Welcome back. Remember in
our first video when we were running around on the
streets of France annoying citizens
by measuring them. Honestly, we were probably
annoying them more by not using the metric system
but that's not the point. The point is, why
were we doing this? We were doing this
because we wanted to know the true average height of
all adult males in France. We took a random
sample of people, a subset of that
larger population, and computed the average there. This seems like a
really good idea. It seems like a really
common-sense idea, but why? That's what we're going to
talk about in this video. Once you actually
have a sample and you measure them and you compute the average, you have a number. The true average out there is a number and your number
is either right or wrong. It's not really worth
talking about then. We want to know before
we take the sample, what statistic we
want to measure. A statistic is any
function of the data. The sample mean x-bar
is a statistic. If I want to look at
the maximum height of my sample, that's a statistic. Another statistic I might want to look at is the median
value in my sample, which means I line up
all the heights from smallest to largest and
grab the one in the middle. Again, once you have a number, you're right or wrong but if we talk about this before
we take the sample, then we've got probability. The probability or
randomness in these values comes from the fact that we're taking these random samples. If you were to do it again
and randomly sample people, you would get different people and you would get
a different value. If you were to do it again, you'd get another sample
mean or sample median or whatever you're computing
and another value. If you pile up these numbers
and make a histogram, they're forming their
own shape known as a sampling distribution
but in theory, we're only going
to get one value. What we want to do is study
the sampling distribution of some statistics like
the sample mean to try to answer questions
before we take the sample. Like if we do this, what is the probability
we're going to be close to the true mean height? Notation for this video and in fact, for
the whole course, we're going to denote a random
sample as a collection of n random variables drawn from a population
or a distribution. The world out there
for us, in theory, is some like normal
distribution or exponential distribution
and these are variables. They're random variables before they're sample before they're observed and locked in
and n is our sample size. They're assumed to
be independent. Meaning if I were to measure the height of someone
I pulled off the street, I'm not also going to
measure his family. I want total random draws of people so that they're
independent of each other. We're also assuming they're
identically distributed. Now there's tall people
and there's short people, but overall there's some
population distribution where we're finding
the tall people and short people and we're
assuming that there's one distribution that describes
the entire population. These words independent
and identically distributed are always
abbreviated by iid. This is identical to the
meaning of a random sample. If I were to give you a
problem to work on and say, suppose you have a random sample, X_1 through X_n, blah, blah, blah, and then go on and
use independent somewhere, you might jump up and say, "You never said these
were independent." But I did because it's part of the definition of
a random sample. Again, random sample means iid and that means independent and
identically distributed. Here's some more notation, suppose we have a random sample from the gamma distribution. I've taken a random
sample of size n from the gamma distribution with
parameters Alpha and Beta. We would write that
X_1 through X_n, squiggly line has the
distribution gamma, Alpha, Beta, just like we
did before with one random variable but now we list them all and we put
iid over this wiggly line. That tells you that
they're independent and identically distributed. They all have the
gamma distribution and they all have the
same gamma distribution. We don't have a gamma
distribution with one Alpha and another gamma distribution
with another Alpha, identical. Again, random sample,
iid, same thing. In general, we're going to use a Theta to denote a
generic parameter. This could be the mean mu
for a normal distribution. It could be the perimeter p
for a geometric distribution. It could be the lambda
for an exponential, and it can even be vector-valued. It could represent
both Alpha and Beta. For the Gamma distribution. We're going to be talking
about estimators. Now I'm saying that
really funny for a reason because I'm trying to distinguish the word from
estimate, estimator estimate. I'm going to say it
funny a couple of times, but then I'll go back to
normal pronunciation. An estimator is a
random variable, it's the sample mean before
you've taken the sample. But we could also look at the maximum, we could
look at the median, we could look at the
idea of sample variance. We talked about variants
in the last lesson, and I will show you how to compute a sample
version of variance. But the estimator is
the random variable, and if we're estimating theta, we denote the estimator
with a theta hat. Now, unfortunately, this hat notation is also
used for an estimate. An estimate is a numerical
value which we still sometimes want to talk about generally like with an x-bar not
knowing the number, but it's a lowercase x
because we're assuming we've already taken it and it's
fixed and no longer random. Theta hat is going to be
an estimator of theta, sometimes an estimate, and I'll stop saying estimator like that. Suppose we're trying to estimate a true
average of something, and we go out into the population and we take a
sample of some fixed size n, and we get a sample mean. That's going to fall somewhere, and hopefully, it's
going to be close to the true mean mu. But if we were to do it
again with a new sample, it's going to be somewhere else. Again, somewhere else. We want our estimator. Said I wasn't going
to say that anymore, but we want our estimator of
mu to be correct on average. X-bar, for example, is
its own random variable with its own distribution that we call a sampling distribution, and it has its own mean
and its own variance, so we can compute
the expected value of x-bar or its variance or many other things that we
usually just associate with random variables we would like. This video is about nice
properties of estimators. We would like the expected value of x-bar to be the true mean mu. If this is true, we say that x-bar is an
unbiased estimator of mu. In general, if an
estimator theta hat of theta is an unbiased
estimator of theta. That means that the expected
value of theta hat is theta. You have a true value,
you're trying to figure out, you grab some kind
of statistic out of the population and
you get a number, and if you did it again,
you get a number, number, number and on average, if you're right, then it's
an unbiased estimator, and that's a really good thing. Suppose that X_1 through
X_n is a random sample from any distribution with mean mu because they're
identically distributed, random sample means IID, they all have the same mean
and the same variance. That doesn't mean that
they're the same numbers once you observe them. But they have the same chance of being in the same places, and on average they're
going to be the same. Because how do you compute
this expected value? You take integral
of x times the PDF, and they all have identical PDFs. Let's let mu be this
common mean and consider looking at
x-bar as an estimator. Here I put the expected value of x-bar and then I rule
out what x-bar is, and then I use the fact
that expectation is a linear operator to pull the one over n out and
to pull the sum out. The expectation in there is mu every time there's n of them. When you add them up, you
have one over n times n mu, for mu, and we didn't
even name a distribution. What we have just seen is that no matter what distribution
you're talking about, the sample mean, x-bar is always an unbiased estimator
of the true mean mu. Which means on average is right. On average, meaning
if you were to take repeated samples, then
it's going to be right. As another quick example, suppose that X_1
through X_n are IID from the exponential
distribution with rate Lambda. If we look at the
sample mean and we wanted to expect a value, we already know that it's the same as the expected
value of any one of them, and recall that the mean for the exponential distribution
was one over lambda. You also have a table of
distributions that was provided with this module to give you lots of other
means of distribution. When you want to
find the expected value of a sample mean, this is as quick as
looking up the mean of the actual distribution
or doing that integral. Suppose I want to estimate
a parameter Theta, so this is a generic
parameter and I have some statistic that I can go
and compute from the data. Maybe I take all the
values and square them and add them up
and return that value. The statistic we already said, has his own sampling
distribution. That means that if you
in theory could sample it again and again
and make a histogram, it would have some shape. If this estimator you're using the statistic is an unbiased
estimator for Theta, then that shape is going to
be centered around Theta. This is a little overly
simplified because we can have crazier shapes that
on average are right, that don't look so symmetric. But suppose I choose
another statistic to look at in the population and
sample it over and over again, then get many values
and look at a histogram and smooth it out and I get this. This still appears to
be right on average. It's still appears to be representing an
unbiased estimator of Theta but it has more spread. If you only get one chance to sample from that population, you're going to get one value from either of these curves. Now, with the blue
curve, that value is more tightly concentrated
around the mean, is less variable and with the other curve it's not
so tightly concentrated. Although they're both
right on average, I think I would rather use the estimator that
corresponds to the blue curve but unbiasness is not the be-all-end-all
property of estimators. What if you took something
with a little bit of bias? But that was highly
predictable and that it had really
small variants. That might be just the
thing you're looking for. It's hard to compare
estimators sometime but we definitely
like unbiased and sometimes you might have
to take a trade-off and to take a little bit of
bias but have small variance, but wouldn't it be
great if you had both? That's going to be our goal. I'm going to let
X_1 through X_n be a random sample from any distribution,
continuous, discrete, any your favorite distribution and I'm going to suppose
that distribution has some mean Mu and variance Sigma squared which I'm
assuming is finite. Now, we already know
that the sample mean X bar is an unbiased
estimator for the mean Mu. But what about its spread? Is it going to be predictable
or really spread out? What can we say
about its variance? If I take the variance of X bar and write it out, remember, we can pull out constants
and they come out squared and we can pull out
sums if they're independent. This is just a generalization of variance of X plus Y
is the variance of X plus the variance of Y to a larger sum and we do have independence because
we have a random sample. Each of these variances is Sigma squared and we're summing
it over and over again, n times, so we get n of
them and in the end, the variance for X
bar is Sigma squared, which is the original variance
over n. It's smaller than the original variance and
this is totally believable. Imagine a university is giving a calc 2 exam and they have 2,000 students and this score on the calc 2 exam could
be all over the place. If you wanted to look at the random variable like you wanted to pull scores
out of that population, you could get scores that
are unfortunately zero and you can get scores that are a 100 or more if there's bonus points. Very variable. But, if instead of just sampling
from that whole group, you instead went into
each recitation section, let's say of size 40 and you
average those and brought back the mean from this
recitation and this recitation. That's not going to
be it's variable because it's going to
be really hard to find a whole section of
people whose average is zero or average is 100 and
we're seeing that here. The variance of a sample mean is the original
variance of the values, the grades in this case
but divided by n. Next up, we're going to briefly
talk about distributions of sums of random variables. It's out of place here
but we really need it as a tool for going forward and in our final
lesson after that, for this module,
we're going to have our first official method of estimation that is beyond just guessing and something that feels right. I'll see you then.