Welcome back. In the final
video of this module, we're going to continue to talk about confidence intervals and in particular a confidence
interval for the difference between means of two
different populations. We're going to assume
we have samples from the two populations and
a few other things. Number one, that the
populations have normal distributions, number two, that the variances are
unknown and number three, that at least one of the
two sample sizes is small. With at least one
small sample size, the sample variance for that
sample or maybe both of them is not a good estimator
for the true variance. I smell a T distribution. Let's formalize this, suppose that I have
a sample of size n_1 from a normal distribution with mean Mu_1 and
variance Sigma_1 squared, and suppose I have an independent
sample of size n_2 from another normal distribution with its own mean Mu_2 and its own
variance Sigma 2 squared. I'm going to assume that
both Sigma_1 squared and Sigma_2 squared are
unknown, and as I said, these samples are independent and I'm going to assume
that at least one of the sample sizes the n_1 or n_2 are small meaning
less than or equal to 30. Our goal is going to be to find 100 times one minus Alpha
per cent confidence interval where the difference
between the two means. In the first half of this video, I'm going to make
a huge assumption, which you might think ridiculous, and that is I'm
going to assume that the unknown variances are equal. Now, this is reasonable
for some models, particularly models of if you
have a product and you have changed the packaging and you are looking at the sales
per month of your product, the variance tends to stay the same from month to month
on something like that. But if you have the extra
special Batman edition cover, then maybe the sales will go
up so the mean will change, but the variance not so much. The second reason
we're assuming this is because it makes
things convenient, so by the end of this video, we're going to remove
this assumption. But for now, let's keep it. The first thing we do with
any confidence interval is find an estimator
for the thing we're trying to make a
confidence interval for and if I'm trying to
estimate Mu_1 minus Mu_2, I think a very natural thing
to do would be to look at the estimator X_1
bar minus X_2 bar, where, as I'm sure you can guess, X_1 bar is the sample mean
for the first sample of size n_1 and X_2 bar is the sample mean for the
second sample of size n_2. The next step is to find the distribution of
our estimator and then see if we can manipulate it to some function of the estimator
and the thing we want, whose distribution is known to us and free of any
unknown parameters, because we can take
that distribution and compute or look
up critical values. I'm getting a little
ahead of myself, because we started with normal distributions both of these sample means are normal, and you know the
means and variances as they relate to the
original population, and so X_1 bar minus X_2 bar, that's a linear
combination of normals, which we know is again normal. To fully specify this normal
distribution we need, it's mean and it's variance. Its mean is the expectation, which if you run through, you get Mu_1 minus Mu_2, which is great because that's what we're
trying to estimate. The variance I'm going to
take a little more slowly and forgive me if I'm insulting
you with my first step, but I just want to make
sure everyone gets this. Suppose I'm looking
for the variance of this estimator X_1
bar minus X _2 bar. Rather than think of subtracting one random
variable from another, I'd rather you think
of it as adding, except that the second one has a coefficient of negative
one in the front. Now, in general, variances
don't pull apart, variances of sums are
not sums of variances, but they are if the random
variables are independent. Here's where the independence
of the two samples comes in so I get to split the
variance and run it through. Now I'm going to pull the
constant negative one out, but you'll recall
that when you pull a constant outside of a variance, it comes out squared. It comes out as positive one. There's the punch
line, the variance of the first sample mean minus the second sample mean is the sum and not the difference
of the variances. The next part of step 2 is to take the fact that we
know we have an estimator with a known distribution and try to manipulate
it into a function of the estimator and
the thing we want to estimate whose distribution
is known to us. One thing I can do
here with a normal I can think of
standardizing it by subtracting its mean
and dividing by the square root of its variance or its standard deviation. This is normal 0,1, but it's not that
useful to us because we don't know sigma 1
squared or sigma 2 squared. All we're doing at this point is assuming that they're equal. If we were to take this
quantity and put it between two Z critical values and try to solve down for M_1 minus
M_2 in the middle, the endpoints would depend on
the unknown sigma squared. Let's suggest this a little bit. Here's what I started with, the standard normal on
the previous slide, I rewrote sigma 1 squared
and sigma 2 squared as just a sigma squared since
they have a common value. I could have called
them both sigma 1 squared or both sigma 2 squared. I chose to just take the
subscripts off altogether. In this next step, I'm
pulling the variants out front of the some
of these fractions. Now we have two
sample variances from different populations and
different sample sizes, so we'd like to put
them together in some way to estimate
the common variance. How should we do this? Maybe we can average them. But I don't think this
is the greatest idea because I think we
should give more weight to one of the sample variances
if it happens to come from a much larger sample or even just a larger sample
than the other one. Again, here's our
sample information, a sample of size and
one and size and two from various
normal populations, we have a first sample
mean and a second sample mean and a first and
second sample variance. I now want to combine
these sample variances in a way that more heavily weights the
one that comes from a distribution where we
have a larger sample, therefore more data
and more information. Assuming that sigma 1
squared equals sigma 2 squared and that we call the
common value sigma squared. I'm going to use this
weighted average. I've multiplied the S_1 squared and S_2 squared
by some coefficients, and I'll get a larger
coefficient or weight on the one that
comes from a larger sample, if there is one, and then divide it by something
so that I do have, in effect, a weighted average. This variance is known
as a pooled variance, and that's why I
have a subscript of a P on the bottom down here. Let's look at this
pooled variance, I'd like to know its distribution and what do we already know? We know that n_1 minus 1 times
the first sample variance over the first variance because this comes from
a normal distribution. We've seen that this ratio has a chi-squared distribution with usually end degrees of freedom, which is the sample size. But in this case, it's a
sample of size and one. I didn't mean n
degrees of freedom, I meant n minus 1. In this case, Chi-squared with n_1 minus 1 degrees of freedom. Similarly, the
other standardized, not standardized in the same way a sample mean is it's
not centered at zero, but a manipulated version of the sample variance
for the second sample has a chi-squared distribution with parameter n_2 minus 1. Now, these two cases were random variables are independent, and we know that when you sum up independent Chi-squared
random variables, you get another Chi-squared and you get to add the
degrees of freedom. In this case n1 minus 1
plus and n_2 minus 1 for a grand total of n1
plus n_2 minus 2. Back to our pooled variance, because we're not
quite there yet. If I take this variance on the left-hand side
and multiply by the associated degrees
of freedom n_1 plus n_2 minus 2 and
divide by the variance. If I do the same
thing to both sides, the right-hand side is going to break up into these
two fractions. We know each of these has a Chi-square distribution and because the samples
are independent, the Chi-squared random
variables are independent, so we get another
Chi-squared out of this. Just like with our
original sample variances. We don't know a nice name for the distribution of the
sample variance alone, but when multiplied by an n minus 1 and divided
by a true variance, we're getting Chi-squared
just like we saw before. Now it's time to go back to this statistic on
which we're going to base our confidence interval. Here I have the statistic
that we started out with. We had that X_1 bar minus X_2 bar is normally
distributed with mean M_1 minus M_2 and variance sigma squared over n_1 plus
sigma squared over n_2. Remember there's no sigma
1 squared and sigma 2 squared anymore because we're assuming that
they're the same. We pulled that sigma squared
out in that denominator. Still inside the square root, and now I'm going to
place the pooled variance in place of where that true variance was.
That's right here. I want to know the
distribution of this thing. Let's rewrite it with the true variance
under there and we're going to divide by this quantity so that we haven't
changed anything. Now, we just saw that
this quantity with an n_1 plus n_2 minus 2 in front of the S squared
has a chi squared distribution and I'm starting
to see a t, aren't you? We need to divide by the degrees of freedom
for that chi squared. When I put in the n_1 plus n_2 minus 2 to get the chi
squared I want to see, I can also divide by it because that's also something
I want to see. What I have here is a standard,
normal, random variable, and what I have over
here is a chi squared random variable divided by its degrees of freedom
in the denominator, and under a square root. Assuming the X bars and the Sigma and the S squareds
are independent, which is something that's true for the normal distribution, it's a little surprising, but it's true, then this is how we define
a t distribution. In particular, the
t distribution with n_1 plus n_2 minus 2
degrees of freedom. So this quantity here, we're going to put between two t critical values
and then solve down for what we care about the mu_1 minus mu_2
in the middle. When you do that, you end up with a confidence interval
that looks like this, so X_1 bar minus, X_2 bar plus or minus the appropriate t
critical value times the square root of
the pooled variance times some stuff with
the n_1 and n_2 in it. Let's look at an example. I didn't put any words
around this example, but suppose we have
two samples from normal distributions
or populations that behave like
normal distributions, and suppose the
first is a sample of size 9 with a sample mean of 23.2 and then observed
sample variance of 4.3. Again, I have found issues
here where it's hard to tell what is capital
and what is lower case, but this x_1 bar and
this s_1 squared are lower case because they are non-random and observed numbers. Now, suppose I have a
sample of size n_2, and n_2 I'm going
to take to be 8, and I have a sample from
a different population, which has a sample mean of 24.7, and a sample variance of 5.2. My goal is going to be to
find a confidence interval, 90 percent, in fact, or the difference in
means mu_1 minus mu_2. We just saw that small samples and ss in place of Sigma
mean we have to be careful and not just try to use the idea that these sample
variances converge and approach the true variances as the sample size gets large because we don't
have large samples. But we're going to appeal
to the t distribution. Here's the formula for
the pooled variance, and when I plug all these
numbers in, I get 4.72. The appropriate t
critical value for a 90 percent confidence interval
would be for us to take a t distribution
in this case with n_1 plus n_2 minus 2
degrees of freedom. So that, in this case, is 15 degrees of freedom. I want to put area
0.9 in the middle, which means I want to put
area 0.05 in each tail. This means that if I just
fill in the lower tail and look at the point that cuts off 0.05 in the upper tail, that has 0.95 in the lower tail, and that's how we look
up at t critical value. We call it t_0.05,15, the 15 denoting the
degrees of freedom. You can look this up in
a table and get 1.753. But I didn't, I went
to R, and in R, just like we had commands
before with dnorm and pnorm, we have a command qt, which will give you the cut
offs or critical values. The first thing you
want to put in is the area you're trying
to cut off to the left, and the second thing is
the degrees of freedom. Here is the formula for
our confidence interval. We have all the numbers, we're going to plug
this in and I get an actual interval
with actual numbers. What does this tell me
about the difference between the sample means? One thing I'm seeing is in
this confidence interval, I would think of the
interval as an interval of plausible values for
the difference Mu_1 minus Mu_2 and you'll notice that this interval actually
contains the value zero. That saying that it is
plausible or possible that based on the sample
we're thinking that it's possible that Mu_1 minus
Mu_2 is equal to 0, which is the same thing
as saying we think it's possible that Mu_1
is equal to Mu_2. Although this course is not
about hypothesis testing, we just did a hypothesis test, we had two true means out there, we wanted to know
maybe if they were possibly equal or one was
greater than the other, so we made a confidence interval. We saw in this case that it
contains the value zero, telling us that zero again is a plausible value from Mu_1 minus Mu_2 and that we just might
have Mu_1 equals Mu_2. To derive this
confidence interval, we assumed that the two true population
variances were equal and really sometimes that is the case for certain types of models, but what if it's not? Then we're not going
to try to make a pooled variance
because the point of the pooled variance was you
estimate one common value. If I just stick the S's so that the sample
variance is down here, the distribution of
this statistic is not known analytically
or exactly. To work with this
statistic and make a confidence interval
or a hypothesis test, this is known as the
Behrens-Fisher problem. The most popular solution to the Behrens-Fisher problem is something known as
Welch's approximation. Welch showed that if you have normal distributions
and small samples and S's instead of Sigma's, this is going to be approximately t-distributed with Nu that's the Greek letter Nu degrees of freedom where Nu is
given by this mess. In R you could do a confidence interval
just like the one we already did, given some data, two samples, two sample
means, two sample variances, and now this
approximate degrees of freedom to tell you what kind of critical value to look up. But rather than do
this one by hand, I'm going to go straight to
R. Just to get some data, I'm going to simulate
10 values from the standard normal distribution
and I'm going to put those values in a vector called
X, and that's right here. Now I'm going to independently
simulate 14 values from another standard
normal distribution and put those in a vector
that I'm calling Y. Now, in R you can type
t.test and the rest of this, and you'll get a
confidence interval for the difference between the means and a little
more information. You're going to get something
that looks like this. There's things in here that
we don't know about yet, but you can definitely see this thing that
I've boxed off in the middle that didn't come
with a beacon box like this. I boxed it off. You
can see it says a 90 percent confidence
interval and gives two numbers, the negative 0.62 to
the positive 0.65. For this particular example, where the means
absolutely were the same, because both samples came from a normal distribution
with mean zero, it's good that we see zero
in the confidence interval because that means we have
a pretty good chance of being able to say that the difference in
the true means is zero or that the true means are equal, and we know they are. This concludes this module. In the next and final
module for this course, we're going to remove these
assumptions about normality. It's not the worst assumption in the world because
the central limit there makes a lot of things look like they have the
normal distribution, even if what you started with was a very different distribution. But it's restrictive,
so in the next module, we're going to really
expand our horizons. I call it confidence
intervals unleashed, and I will see you there.