Welcome to statistical
inference for estimation in data science. My name is Jem Corcoran and I will be your guide for
the magical journey ahead. At the filming of this video, the United States is going through some pretty
big elections. What we're seeing
is that the results are not really matching what was expected based on polling
data. What is a poll? A poll is when a person or organization goes out
into the world and they randomly select people from a large population
that they care about, and they form a group or sample. They study that sample to try to figure out what the
larger population wants. This is inference, drawing conclusions about a
larger population based on a relatively
small sample. It's not as easy as saying 30 percent of the people
in my sample like Candidate A and
therefore 30 percent in the population must
like Candidate A. Statistical inference
uses theory and formal arguments to
draw conclusions about that population in a way
that takes into account the uncertainty that
comes from only looking at a smaller and
randomly selected sample. In this course, we're going
to be making a lot of assumptions about our
larger population. It's going to be
pretty idealized. Real life is messy. Real life violates assumptions, and real life is rarely ideal. But being able to do
statistical inference in these idealized situations is a stepping stone to dealing
with more realistic data. This module is about
point estimation. We're going to try
to be estimating a quantity of interest out there in the larger population. We're going to look
at the sample and do some calculations and
return a value or point. You wouldn't be
alone in thinking, should I really just
be returning a point? Or maybe I should return a whole interval of values
representing some error, a little plus or minus
action around that point. You'd be right, that
is what you should do, but it starts with a
point, building blocks. I know there's a burning question on all of your minds right now, and that is, what is the average height of all
adult males in France? I sent a crack team of TAs out to the streets of France
with a measuring tape, and I had them randomly select 10 people and measure
their height in inches, which probably upset a
lot of people because the TAs are not using the
metric system, but I digress. I'm assuming that the measurements have
infinite accuracy. I'm not stuck with
rounding off to the nearest inch or
the nearest tenth of an inch or the nearest half
of an inch or whatever. I can go to as many
decimal places as I want. I took those 10 heights that they measured and recorded
and I made a histogram. What you're seeing on
the horizontal axis is a bunch of heights in inches that have been grouped
up into intervals or bins. It's not important right now how I chose to group them up. I just group them up in some way. What you're seeing on
the vertical axis, well, this could be counts. It could be that if you have two people in a particular bin, the bar goes up to
a height of two, but that's not what's
happening here. It could be relative frequency. That would mean that the bar corresponding to a
particular bin will go up to a number representing
the proportion of people that you saw in that bin, but that's not what it is either. In this instance,
you're seeing something known as density on the y-axis. This is a number such that the total area of
each bar is going to represent the
proportion of people in your sample that you saw
in the corresponding bin. This isn't a lot of data, so let's kick it up a notch. This histogram is
starting to take on the shape of a bell curve. In fact, I know an exact
representation for this curve. This represents
perfect information. It's not really what you would have if you had the
entire population, it's a little more than that. It's a model for the
idealized population. It tells us how the
heights are distributed. Most of them are here, less of them are here and here. We never had this much data or rarely have this much data. Let's bring it down a bit. We're down to a
sample of size 100. Because of the symmetry
of the bell curve, it appears that the
true average height of all adult males in
France is about here. We're going to call it Mu, which is a very
common notation for an average in an ideal population as opposed to a sample
average or sample mean. In fact, if I take many
samples of size 100 and compute the sample
mean or average for each, then these sample means, which are denoted by x bar, which is just an
average in your sample, these are going to pile
up in a certain way. They have a certain chance
of being over here, and a certain chance
of being, say, over here and, say, over here. We're interested in the shape of this sampling distribution. So that when we estimate
the true mean Mu with x bar computed
from a single sample, we can make certain claims
about our accuracy. There are many more
quantities of interest about the entire population that
might be of interest to us. There are many more often
recurring shapes that we might see out there if we're measuring
something different. Next up, we're going to talk about some of these
common shapes. I'm so glad you decided
to take this course. I think we're going to have
a lot of fun together, and I will see you in the
next lesson. Magical.