Welcome back. Let's try
and experiment, shall we? I'm going to flip a fair
coin where I get heads with probability 1/2 or tails
with probability 1/2. We're going to define a variable that we'll call capital X. We'll define it to be 1, if we get heads on the
coin or 0 if we get tails. Now before the coin is flipped, the value of X is unknown. It's waiting on the results of this experiment
involving randomness, so we call X a random variable. Now in general, outside of this coin flipping experiment,
a random variable, is a kind of mapping
from the set of outcomes of an experiment
involving probability, into the real numbers. It is convention in
probability and statistics to always use capital letters when talking about
random variables. Another way we might
write this down, is to remove the heads
and tails entirely, and just say that it
takes on the value 1 and 0 with probability 1/2 each. Still another way is to make this very probability centric and to write the probability that
capital X equals little x. This is a function where we can plug in different
values for little x. If we plug in 1, we
want to get 1/2. If we plug in 0, we
want to get 1/2. If we plug in 7, we want to get 0
because in our heads, tails 1 and 0 experiment, we will never return
the value of a 7, we will do that
with probability 0. This function of little x is known as a probability
mass function, and it's usually denoted
by a lowercase f of x. Now in a problem where you have multiple random variables, say a random variable capital X and a random variable capital Y, if you want to write down both probability mass functions, rather than using
an F and say a G, we're going to generally stick to F's and use subscripts like this. Now in here, these are
arguments to the function. Although we're going
to try to avoid it, we can talk about
the probability that the random variable capital
X equals a value little y. Here is the probability
mass function, or pmf, that we're talking about in our coin
flipping experiment. This function tells us how, if we had a number line with the numbers
representing outcomes, how the probabilities
are distributed, and It's pretty boring. We're going to get probability
1/2 on each of these. I made a height of 1/2, and if you remember
in the intro video, I'm plotting density here, so the base of my
rectangles is length 1. The total area of each rectangle
is the probability 1/2. let's make this a little
more interesting. Maybe the coin is not
exactly a fair coin. If we flip something where we get heads with some
probability little p, where that's a fixed number
between 0 and 1 and then get tails with the rest
of the probability, then, we have a slightly
more general model, which depends on a number that we need to fix called a parameter p. This is anything
between 0 and 1 inclusive. The probability mass function
now looks like this, and this is such an
important random variable that comes up so
often it gets a name. It's known as a Bernoulli
random variable, or the distribution
of values is known as a Bernoulli distribution with parameter p. Now we write in shorthand X
with a squiggly line, and that squiggly line can be read, 'Has the distribution.' If we write X squiggly
line Bernoulli p, or maybe just Bern p,
some people write that, that means we're talking about a random variable that
takes on two values, 1 and 0 with probability
p and 1 minus P. Now I wanna talk about
a little bit of notation that I think will
be helpful in this course, and that is an
indicator function. I'm going to let A be
some set of real numbers. It could be like a
continuous interval or a set of discrete
points, or even weirder. I am going to talk
about a function that we'll call capital I sub A, and it's a function of
X, and this will be 1 or 0 depending on whether that
X is in the set A or not. With this indicator, we can write the Bernoulli probability
mass function like this. Note that when I
plug in X equals 1, I get this part is p, and then I get 1 minus P to the 0 which goes away, that's 1. Then I plug in 1
to the indicator, and because a 1 is
in that set below, the Indicators switches on
and gives us the value of 1. Overall here, if I
plug in X equals 1, I get out P. If I
plug in X equals 0, I will get out 1 minus P, and if I plug in X equals 7, it might look like I'm
starting to get P^7, 1 minus P^1 minus 7. But then you look
at the indicator and when you plug 7 in there, because it's not in
this set 0 and 1, that's going to be 0 and
the whole thing will 0 out. I think Indicators are really convenient for probability
and statistics, and it's for a reason larger than just writing it more compactly because I'm not
even sure we do that. Is it really that hard to say here's my probability
mass function, and by the way, it's zero otherwise where
I haven't defined it, that's not hard at all, but I'm using indicators
for something that I hope to convince you of
the importance of later. Alternative common
notation for indicators are this double
line one or a chi, or sometimes something known
as an Iverson bracket, which is just square brackets, which I think is
really hard to tell apart from other symbols
we're going to be using. Here's another experiment, let's go beyond
the coin flipping; suppose I have a sequence of independent trials
of an experiment, and suppose that each
trial can result in one of two possible outcomes,
success or failure. Further, suppose
that the probability of success is a number little p, and the probability of failure is the rest of the probability, one minus p. Let's define a random variable X
to be the number of trials until we see
the first success. This random variable
X is said to have a geometric distribution
with parameter p, and we might write it like this; X squiggly line has
the distribution geom p although I do have
something more to say about this notation at
the end of this lesson. What is the probability
mass function here? First of all, if we're counting the number of trials
until the first success, you'll note that X takes on
positive integer values 1, 2, 3 and there's
really no upper bound. To figure out the
probability mass function, let's look at a
particular number. Let's look at the
probability that X equals 4. So to get x to be 4, we need to see our first
success on the fourth trial, and that means we
need to see failure, then failure, then
failure, and then success. These are independent trials. Hopefully you've seen in some more beginning probability
course that when you are computing the probability for something involving
independent events, you get to multiply
the probabilities. In this case, they are 1 minus p, 1 minus p, 1 minus p,
and p respectively. We get the probability that
X equals 4 is 1 minus p cubed times p. What
can we say in general? In general, the probability
that X equals little x, this means the first success
happened on the X trial. We had failure, failure, failure, we had X
minus 1 of those. So that's why you're seeing
1 minus p^x minus 1, and we have a single success, which will have probability
p. This function will only take on this value if the x's
we're plugging in are 1, 2, 3 on up. We could write this
piecewise where we say, and the function is 0 otherwise, or we can use an indicator. Again, this function says
that when you plug in an X that's actually
in this set down here, this whole thing
takes on the value 1, and if it's not down there, it takes on the value 0. X is the number of trials
until the first success. But there's another
way that people commonly define this
geometric distribution, and that is to
count the number of failures before
the first success. In our example before, when X was four, we had four trials until
we saw our first success. If we define it this way, the X would be three
because there's three failures before
that first success, and it's not hard to use the same reasoning to show that the probability mass
function looks like this. Now people still call this a geometric random variable,
myself included, and what I'm about to show
you is not common notation, but I think it might be
useful in this course. To know which geometric
we're talking about exactly, we'll either use the
context of the problem, is what we're counting taking
on the value zero or not? Or we'll denote it by putting
a 0 and 1 subscript on the geom when we say x has the geometric distribution
with parameter p. There are so many more discrete
distributions that arise so often that
they get names. Rather than take you
through all of these, I'm now going to send you to some reading
where you can learn other common discrete
distributions as well as their names and
notations for them, and this maybe review
for a lot of you. If it is, I'd advise
at least glancing it over so that we're all on the same page with our notation. Check it out and I'll be waiting for you in the next lesson.