Welcome back. In this lesson, we're going to learn about continuous random variables
and their distributions. Suppose that you hit
the streets with an infinite accuracy
measuring tape, randomly select a person
and measure their height. The chance or probability
that that person is between say three feet and eight
feet is quite high. There's close to 100
percent chance or probability of one that the height is going to
be between those values. Now the probability that
the person is between 62 inches and 64 inches
is much smaller. In fact, if you keep
shrinking the interval 62 and 63, 62 and 62.5, 62 and 62.1, the chance is getting smaller and smaller and the probability
is going to zero. Now, remember we're measuring
with infinite accuracy. If we want, say, we
can only measure up to the nearest inch or the
nearest tenth of an inch, let's say tenth of an inch, we would have a discrete
random variable because the heights would take on
discrete values like 50, 50.1, 50.2, 50.3 in inches. We're assuming infinite
accuracy here. If you're looking for a person
who's exactly 73.2 inches, you're not going to
find this person. If you think you've
found this person, look again, they're probably
73.0000000000000006. Now, you can't find
that person either. But the point is, there's so many possibilities when
you have infinite accuracy. You will never find this person, and the probability is zero. Now from random variables, I'm going to let X be the height of the person that I measure. For continuous random
variable like height, the probability of
seeing someone who is exactly 73.2 inches is zero, and in fact, the probability
of finding someone who is exactly little x inches is zero. I'd like to define the analog of the
probability mass function. If I let f of x be the
probability that X equals X, this is very uninteresting
because it's always zero. For a continuous random variable, we're going to define
instead something known as a probability density
function or PDF. We're still going to denote
this by the letter F, and rather than
equaling a probability, it's going to represent a curve under which area
represents probability. For example, if you have
a random variable X with a PDF f and you want to find the probability that
X is greater than or equal to a and less
than or equal to b, you would integrate
the PDF from a to b. If you wanted to find the
probability that X is strictly greater than a
and strictly less than b, it would be the same
integral because there's no area under the curve
at those single points. There's two properties
a PDF needs to have. Given a function f, it would be a PDF for something. If number 1, it is non-negative, and number 2, it integrates to one if you integrate
over the whole world. In the height example, if this is a PDF for height, integrating from
minus infinity to infinity is like trying to find the probability that the
next person you measure is between minus infinity
and infinity inches. That's definitely
going to happen, probability 1,
because that's two. The bell curve we've been
looking at already in our first lesson is a
probability density function. Remember our height
histogram and the curve we put on top of it,
here's the formula. This is a function of X, but you'll notice there's
other things in here, and these are
parameters that help us change the shape and
location of the curve. The parameters are Mu
and Sigma squared, and we say that X has a normal distribution
with mean Mu and variance Sigma squared
and write it this way. Mu is a location parameter. If you change the value of Mu, the entire bell curve is
going to slide around. If you increase Sigma squared, it's going to get fatter and therefore shorter because
the total area is one, So if it gets fatter,
it has to come down. If Sigma squared gets smaller, it's going to get
really tall and thin. Another important
distribution that is going to come up a lot is called the
exponential distribution. Here's the PDF. The
exponential distribution takes on all positive values and it's described in
terms of a PDF with a parameter Lambda that has
to be greater than zero. If this got to be negative, then we'd have a
negative out front and our PDF would be negative, and that doesn't make sense. Also, if our X's are positive and this
Lambda was negative, then the negative
of the negative up here would be a
positive exponent. This thing is going to blow up, it's not going to be able
to integrate to one. Lambda is called
a rate parameter, and that's because this
distribution is usually used to model rates of occurrences
between something, inter arrival or inter
occurrence times. If you are modeling
customer traffic into a bank and you're sitting outside the bank and
watching people walk in, the times between
consecutive customers could be modeled with an
exponential distribution. Or in a physic setting if you
have a lots going on with particles bombarding the time to the next collision could have an exponential distribution. These are two cases where the exponential distribution is a really good model
of what's going on. Most people denote
this random variable as X squiggly line has the distribution exponential
with parameter Lambda. I'm not going to
use this notation, but I'm for now, and that's because I need to motivate for you why I want
to change the notation. I'll come back to a notation for this in one or two videos. At this time, I'm
going to direct you to yet another
ungraded assignment, which will take
you through all of the popular continuous
distributions that we're going to
need in this course. Check it out, become
somewhat familiar with them. I will see you in the next video.