Welcome back. In this video
we're going to talk about the idea of the spread
of a distribution. Suppose you're trying to measure that true average height of all adult males in
France and you go out and you randomly
select a sample of a fixed size and you
compute the sample average. That seems like a
good idea. But why? One reason it might be a
good idea is if we can show that on average,
it is correct. What do I mean by on average? I mean that suppose you
got another sample of size n and you computed the new sample average is going
to be a little different. Suppose this is the true mean mu, and I take my first sample, and I compute the sample mean. I'm going to get a number maybe here and even next time
I'll get a number here. Maybe the next time
here, maybe here. I'd like two things
of this statistic, and a statistic is any
number computed from data, which is what we're doing when we choose N values
and average them. The two things I would
like out of this statistic is;I would like it to be
in the right location. If the true mean is
here and the thing I measuring from the population
tends to be over here. It's not that useful. But there's another problem. If the true mean is here and that statistic
we're measuring tends to be around the true mean centered
in the right place, if it is very variable. Here's an example of something also centered in the right place. You want this, or
do you want this? You want this than you want this. You want more predictability and less variability and that's
what this lesson is about. It's about variance,
which is one of the most important measures of spread that a statistician uses. Just like the expected value
of a random variable X, had two notations for us. One was a capital E of X and the other was
the Greek letter mu. This variance has two notations, so one is going to be Var of
X and the other is the Greek letter sigma squared or
you may use just V of X. Either way it's going
to be defined as the expected squared distance away from the mean for
a random variable X. So why use this? One of the first
questions some people ask me when they're first shown this
expression for variance, is why don't we just look at the expected value
of X minus its mean. The reason is expectation is a linear operator and the
mean mu is a constant. If we run this
expectation through, we would get zero every time
for every distribution. This is not a good
measure of spread or really anything subzero. The next thing people
usually bring up when I introduce variance is the idea of the expected absolute
value of the distance between the random
variable x and its mean. This is a pretty good idea, but it's not going to be as
computationally convenient as the squared formula up
here for some future things. So certainly for computation numerically, it's easy enough. Bam, you are positive. We're going to have
things coming up in this course where
it's going to be more convenient for us to use this
definition for variance. As another bonus, the squared has the great property that it magnifies large
deviations from the mean. When you square big numbers, they become really big and yet it doesn't magnify
small deviations. If you square a number between
01, it gets even smaller. This is an extra benefit of
squaring this X minus mu. Okay. If you take the square
root of the variance, we call that the
standard deviation, and we denote it by
a lowercase sigma. This is just another
measure of spread, but some people really
like to use this because it brings you back
to the units of the problem. For example, if you're measuring people's heights in inches, the variance calculation
involves squaring and so the units of that is
going to be squared inches. If you take the square root, it's still a measure of how
spread out those heights are, but it's back in the
units of the problem. If you look at the
normal distribution with mean mu and
variance sigma squared, and you look at its PDF
and do a little calculus. You will see that where it goes from concave down to concave up is exactly one standard
deviation away from the mean. There is an alternate
way to compute variance that a lot of people find easier. It's totally subjective
though and that is, let us square this out and
run the expectation through. Now over here, I have mu and so in the middle two
mu squared and there's another mu squared out there
and I combine them and I get the expected value of X
squared minus mu squared, and mu is the
expected value of X. An alternate formula for variance is the expected value of X squared minus the expected
value of X all squared. What happens if you multiply a random variable by a constant, a non-random thing,
and take the variance? If this was the expected value, we could just pull
that a right on out, but what happens here? To figure this out, I'm going
to say that the constant a times the random variable X is just a new random variable
and I'm going to call it Y, and note that the
mean for Y turns out to be a times the mean for X. So the variance of aX
is the variance of Y, and here we're using our
definition for the variance of Y. I'm going to plug in the aX for the Y and the a Mu X for the Mu of Y and I'm
going to pull it out. The a is on both terms inside the parenthesis and
when I pull it out, there's a squared
and it pulls out squared and then comes all the way out of
the expectation. So what we get is a squared
times the variance of X. If you have a
constant in front of your random variable and you want to compute the variance, you can pull it out but
it comes out squared. Another thing that we're
going to care about is, what is the variance of the
sum of two random variables? Is it the sum of the variances? Unfortunately, it's not, and this is because
of the square. It's for the same
reason that numbers a plus b squared is not the same as a
squared plus b squared. What is the variance of a sum? We will see that we can
split it up into the sum of the variances if X
and Y are independent, but if not, we're going to need another concept
known as covariance. I'm going to describe covariance
first through a picture. The covariance between X
and Y is defined to be the expected value of X minus its mean times Y minus its mean, and notation that
we're going to use for this is Sigma sub X Y and note that the covariance of X with itself is
just the variance X. So what is covariance? We're going to try to figure
this out through a picture. Here I took two
random variables, X and Y and I went out
and I observed them, maybe I don't know, approximately 20 times, and I got realizations or actual sampled numerical
values and plotted them here. You can see as one goes up, the other one goes up as well. They have this positively
sloped linear relationship. What would the covariance of random variables that
looked like this be? The first thing I'm going
to do is try to guess at where the true mean for X
and the true mean for Y is. This is probably off because
this is a very small sample, but I'm going to guess
they're about here and here. For these points in the
upper-right quadrant, you'll notice that
all the X values are to the right of the X mean and all of the Y values
are above the Y mean. If you look at X minus it's mean and Y minus it's
mean and multiply them, you have to positive values, which you'll multiply to
become a positive value. Down here in this
lower left quadrant, you get to negative
values which you'll multiply to become
a positive value. If you think about averaging these deviations
for every dot here, there'll be a couple of dots, at least in this picture, where these quantities, the product is negative,
but not so many. The positive products really
dominate this picture, and this is an example of random variables X and Y
with a positive covariance. Here's an example of
negative covariance, so it's a measure of
a linear relationship between the random variables and the slope is not
at all important. Let's look at our original
positive covariance example. Now in the next slide,
I'm going to make these blue dots light. They might be hard to
see, but watch for them, and then we're going
to add some red dots, and the red dots are an example of sampled values of an X and Y that are different that had a larger positive covariance. So you'll see it's not
really about slope, it's about tightness
around a line. If you have a covariance
close to zero, you're going to see
something like a cloud. Imagine what we did
before breaking this up with the mean for
X and the mean for Y, there are approximately
the same number in all four quadrants, and so we'll get positives and negatives averaging out to zero. There is no upper or lower
bound on covariance. So what is a large covariance? Is one million? Seems pretty large but not
when compared to five million, and it's also in
really weird units. An example of two random
variables that have a positive covariance,
maybe a weak one, but probably has a
positive covariance is on the x axis to record the height of
an individual and on the y-axis to record
their shoe size. Taller people tend
to have larger feet, but it's not a given. So I think it's a weak
positive relationship. The point is that it's
going to be in weird units. If you compute the covariance
there, you're taking, your inches units that
you're using for height, and whatever units shoe sizes are in, and multiplying them. What the heck does
that even mean? Because it's in
these weird units, and because there's no
upper and lower bound, we're going to look at
something known as correlation, which is just covariance
that has been standardized. This is standardized so that this number is actually going to be between minus 1 and 1. I'm using CORR instead of COR just because if
I'm writing this, and my handwriting
is a little sloppy, a COV and a COR could be really
difficult to tell apart. Correlation is noted by a Rho_X, Y, and then using our other
already established notation. Rho of X, Y is sigma_X, Y divided by the two standard
deviations multiplied. We can show algebraically that this is between minus
1 and positive 1. If it's positive 1, what you're going to see is a perfect linear relationship, it has nothing to
do with the slope, it has to do with
the tightness of the spread around the line. If you have a correlation of 1, that means there's no
variability at all. For every X, you know exactly
where Y is along the line. If it's negative 1, you have the same thing but
with negative slope. As an alternative for
computing covariance, just like we had two ways
to compute variance, I am going to multiply this stuff out and run the
expectation through. Then you see we've got a
mean for X and mean for Y. The final three terms are all a product of a mean
for X, and the mean for Y, and when you add them up and
take care of the negatives, you get a negative Mu_X_Mu_Y, you get a single one of them. This, of course, is
the expected value of X times the expected value of Y. We've seen this thing before, this expression when
we were talking about independence
of random variables. We proved that if X
and Y are independent, then the expected value of the product is the product
of the expected value, in that case, this
covariance would be zero. We know that if X and
Y are independent, the covariance is zero, but a covariance of zero does not imply
they're independent. We had a specific example, and I'll remind you
of it in a moment. But I do want to point
out that because of how correlation is defined to be
covariance divided by stuff, the fraction can only be zero
if the numerator is zero. Covariance is zero if and
only if correlation is zero. If we have a correlation
or a covariance of zero, we say that X and Y
are uncorrelated. We did have that example where we had a
covariance of zero, but they were not independent
random variables, but we do have one direction. If X and Y are independent, they will have a covariance of zero and that means they'll have a correlation of zero and that means we get to say
they're uncorrelated. But if they're uncorrelated, they may or may not
be independent, as we had in the
previous example, where I had a random
variable X that had mean 0 and I defined Y
to be X squared, which is pretty darn dependent. The expected value of X, Y was the expected
value of X cubed, which was also zero. If you go back and look at
our covariance formula, which is not up here right now, you'll get that the covariance between this X and Y are zero, and yet they're pretty
darn dependent. This whole conversation about covariance and
correlation came about when we were trying to figure
out what the variance of the sum of two
random variables is. The sum of two random variables is another random variable, and I'm going to call it Z
and it has its own mean, Mu_Z, which turns out to be the mean for X
plus the mean for Y. If I want the variance
of the sum of X and Y, then I just want
the variance of Z, and here is the definition
of the variance of Z. I'm going to plug in, the fact that Z is X plus Y and the mean is the
sum of the means. Now, I'm going to regroup these, I'm going to put the
mean for X next to X, and the mean for Y next Y. In the next slide, I
am going to square this out but I'm going to keep
those two clumps together. I'm going to think of
this as just two terms summed up and I'm going
to square it out. After doing that and running the expectation
through, we get this. You can see that we have
the variance of X plus 2 times the covariance of X
and Y plus the variance of Y. We've answered our question about the variance of a sum and
we know something else. That is, if X and
Y are independent, the covariance is zero, and the variance of the sum is going to be the
sum of the variances. Imagine you want to estimate
the true average value of something in a population and you grab a sample and
you average those. This seems like a good idea. It seems like a
common sense idea. But why, and can we do better? What does better even mean? We're going to talk about this in the next video.
I'll see you there.