Hello, welcome back.
In this video, we're going to talk about transformations of distributions. Suppose you have a
random variable X and it may be discrete, such as the geometric
distribution or the binomial distribution, or continuous such as the exponential distribution
or the normal distribution, and you have this random
variable X and you want to manipulate it
and put it through a function and figure out what the distribution of the
new random variable is. For example, you might want
to move from X to X squared. That's what this video
is about and we're going to start with the discrete case. We're going to do this discrete
case through an example. Hopefully, you've
already heard of the binomial distribution
either from before this course or from the materials provided
earlier on in this module. But as a quick review, the binomial distribution
comes about this way. Suppose you have a sequence of n independent trials
of an experiment, where each trial can
result in one of two possible outcomes,
success or failure. Now suppose that
the probability of success remains the same
from trial to trial. We're going to call this p, and this is a parameter
of this model. The random variable
X is going to count the number of successes
in the n trials. We say that X has a binomial distribution
with parameters n and p, and we write it like this. Before we do a transformation, let's see if we can find the
probability mass function for the binomial.
Here's the setup. Well, I gave you
the setup, right? There's n independent
trials and I want to look at it
in a specific case. Suppose that n is four and we want to find
the probability that X, the number of
successes, is three. We have to think about
the ways we can get exactly three
successes in n trials. We can get success,
success, success, failure, or success, success, failure, success, or you get the idea. There's actually four
ways for us to position the successes and the one failure for a total of four trials. Now each of these four outcomes they're disjoint from each other. You cannot witness
success, success, success failure, and at the same time witness success,
failure, success, success. By disjointness, we get to break up this
probability into a sum. Then for each of these terms, we're seeing the four
different trials, and those were assumed
to be independent. We get to multiply the
individual probabilities. The first one where we have three successes and one failure, we're going to get
p times p times p times the failure probability, which is one minus p. The
next term we're going to get the same four factors just
in a different order, and in fact, for all
four of these terms, we're going to see p
cubed times one minus p. So we just have to
add them up and we get four p cubed one minus
p. To do this in general, for general n and for
general little x, when I want to find
the probability that the random variable
X is equal to little x, we are going to have x, little p's, and the rest of them n minus x, one minus p's, and it really comes
down to counting to figure out how
many terms there are, to figure out what to put
in the place of the four. Hopefully, you've all seen
the combinatoric n choose x, which is n factorial over x factorial times n
minus x factorial, and this is the number
of ways to choose x things out of n things. In our case, the
things are positions, one, two, three, n positions. We're trying to choose x of them to sprinkle
in the successes. Here is the probability
mass function. It's just like we did
before with the four. We've got a p every time we have a success and
there's x of those. We have a one minus p for
the rest of the trials, and there are n minus x of those, and then we have to count up
the total number of ways to scatter those successes
in the n trials. We get the n choose x, and of course the indicator, because the number
of successes in the n trials can take on
values zero, one, two, up through n. Again, this is the binomial distribution with parameters n and p, and I think we're ready
to make a transformation. Suppose that we have X with
this binomial distribution, and a new random variable
Y defined to be n minus X. What is the distribution of Y? I think in this case
we can probably guess, and that's because we
have n trials and X is counting a number of
successes in those n trials. So n minus X is counting
the number of failures. If we re-label success
failure and failure success and use one
minus p in place of p, I think we're going to see another binomial
distribution here, but let's suppose we had
no idea how to do this, my advice to you for this transformation
is to just do it, to write out what you want
and what you know and go. Here is the PMF for X and
what I want is the PMF for Y. The probability that the random variable Y
is equal to little y. Now all I know is
that capital Y is n minus X and I do know how to compute
probabilities for X. We wrote out the formula above. So I'm going to solve
for this capital X. The probability that
X equals n minus y, I'm just going to
plug n minus y into my formula for
probabilities for X. We get this and we're kind of done if we want only a probability mass function, but if we want to name
the distribution, maybe we need to massage
this a little further. Also, I think it would just be good practice because we're trying to find a function of y and right now, for example, our indicator says that n minus y takes on
the values zero, one, two up through n. It would make a lot
more sense when giving this PMF for y to not tell
us what n minus y could be, but to tell us what y can be. Lets simplify this. I'm going to start
with the indicator. Since n minus y is taking
values from zero to n, let's look at the first one. If n minus y is zero, that means that y is n
and if n minus y is one, that means that y is n minus one all the way down to the end, n minus y is n that
means that y is zero. The fact that n minus y has to live in the set, zero through n, is equivalent to y living
in a set zero through n. No one cares about the order is just a set
of possible values. The other thing I
want to simplify here is the combination. The n choose n minus y. Let's do this by
looking at an example. Suppose we want to compute
five choose three, this is five factorial over three factorial times five minus
three or two factorial. We can certainly interchange those two numbers
in the denominator. So we're going to get
the same thing as if we had started
with five choose two, because that would be
five factorial over two factorial times the
difference factorial, the three. In fact, anytime these two
numbers add up to this number, the combination is
going to be the same. In our PMF up here, the n choose n minus y, can be rewritten as n choose y. Plugging this stuff
in, the new indicator, the new combination,
we get this PMF. I've also re- arranged the p and one minus p just to show
it in the binomial form, because success has become failure and failure
has become success. We can see that Y has a binomial distribution
with parameters n, and one minus p as expected. Again, when finding
the distribution of transformations of a
discrete random variable, my advice to you would
be to just do it. Just write out what you want, plug-in what you know and go. We're ready to talk about transformations for
continuous random variables. There's a problem here, we can't just start with
what we want and go because the PDF or probability
density function doesn't have a nice
interpretation as a probability. It's a curve under which
area represents probability, but you know what does? The cumulative
distribution function. The cumulative
distribution function or CDF is usually
denoted by a capital F and it's defined as the cumulative probability that X is anywhere less than or
equal to some little x. If X is discrete we can find this cumulative
probability by adding up all the probabilities less
than or equal to little x. In the continuous case, we get it by integrating. You'll notice the way I
wrote things in this sum. I didn't say u goes from minus
infinity up to X. I don't like to say that because I
don't think it looks right. If the random variable doesn't
take on integer values, it can still be discrete. Taking off, for
example,1, 1.1, 1.2. But if I were to sum
it up in this way, that really implies
integer value, so we're not going to do that. If X is continuous, we get the CDF by
integrating the PDF, and the fundamental theorem of calculus tells us
we can undo this and get the PDF from the
CDF by taking a derivative. We're ready to transform
our distribution. Suppose that X is a continuous
random variable with some PDF f sub x.
I'm going to let y, sorry, I'm going to let g be a continuous differentiable
and invertible function, and really what I
wanted to be is nice. I'm going to take a derivative, so I should be able to
take the derivative. I'm going to take an inverse. Hopefully, I'm able
to take an inverse. For transformations, we're not restricted to functions
that are so nice, but that's what we're
talking about right now. I'm going to define a
new random variable Y as g of capital X. Before I do that
I wanted to point out that if g is invertible, it has to be either strictly
increasing or strictly decreasing because if it goes up and then
down for example, and you look at a point on
the y-axis and you want to invert it and figure
out where that came from on the x-axis, it's going to come from
two different points. By virtue of being invertible, it is either strictly increasing
or strictly decreasing. The inverse of an
increasing or decreasing function is still
increasing or decreasing, which might sound a little weird at first, maybe
counter-intuitive, you're inverting the operation, maybe it should go the other way. We can prove my claim
here algebraically, but just to get through this
and get back to the stats, I just want to convince
you graphically. Here is an increasing
function plotted in blue, and its inverse is going to be the mirror image over
the line y equals x. You can see that the
concavity changed, we went from concave
up to concave down, but both functions
are increasing. The same would hold
if we started with a decreasing function. I
think we're ready to go. I have a continuous
random variable X, with a PDF of sub x, and I'm defining y to be g of x, and g is nice. Let's start with the CDF for Y because CDF is interpretable
as a nice probability. I'm going to start with a
case where g is increasing. The CDF for Y is the probability that Y is less
than or equal to little y, the only thing I know is that
this Y is equal to g of X. Just like before in
the binomial example, I want to solve down for the X. I'm going to apply g inverse to both sides of this inequality. The fact that g inverse is increasing is going to
maintain the ordering. Here's the x-axis, if you have a point A that is
below a point B, and you put it into an
increasing function, this will go up somewhere
and this will go up further, so on the y-axis, they'll maintain their ordering. That's why this inequality holds when I take g
inverse of both sides, and on the left side, I
get some cancellation. This looks like the CDF for X evaluated at g inverse of y, so we're ready for the
PDF through a derivative. The PDF for y is the derivative with respect
to y of the CDF for y. We've written that CDF in
terms of the CDF for X. Now I'm going to take the
derivative with respect to Y, do a little chain rule action, the derivative of the
CDF is the PDF for x, and then I have to multiply
by the derivative of what's inside, and there we have it, a formula for the PDF for Y, in terms of the PDF for X, and the given function. Really quickly I'm
going to blow through the other case when
g is decreasing. The only thing really,
well, two things, but one major thing
that's going to change here is that if you have
a decreasing function, and on your x-axis, you look at a point A
smaller than a point B, and you plot them into
the decreasing function, the point A is going to map up to something higher
than the point B. If you have an A less than B, and you evaluate both at
a decreasing function, the results are going
to switch order. Just doing what we did before, plugging in what
capital Y equals, taking G inverse of both sides. We're going to flip
this inequality. Cancelling the G and G
inverse on the left, I get X. I want to
turn this into a CDF, but the inequality is
going in the wrong way. I'm going to use the
compliment of this event, and turn this around and
say this is one minus the probability that X is
less than G inverse of Y. This, isn't exactly
a CDF in general, but in the continuous case it is. Now, the reason it's not
exactly a CDF in general, is because the
inequality is strict. The CDF is defined
as the probability that X is less than or
equal to something. But in the continuous case, that's going to be
exactly the same thing. Adding this point is not going to change anything, and so, we've written the CDF for Y
in terms of the CDF for X. Let's go for the PDF,
let's take the derivative, a little chain rule
action, and we get this. At first glance you
might be alarmed, because of the negative out front and PDFs can't be negative. But, G inverse is
decreasing in this example, so this derivative
is negative as well. When you multiply
that negative value times the negative out front, everything is nice and positive. Let's just make it
nice and positive to begin with by ignoring the negative out front and the negative in that derivative, and just put an
absolute value on it. This is a formula that will
work both in the increasing and decreasing cases.
Let's try it out. As an example, I want to look at the gamma distribution with
parameters alpha and beta. I think we've already hit this up in this module, but if not, you should've seen it in the supplementary
reading for this module. Some people, when they talk about a gamma distribution
mean one thing, and some people mean another. When I write that X has a
gamma distribution with parameters alpha and
beta, denoted this way. I mean, the PDF looks like this. Some people have all of the betas replaced
by a one over beta. That's not wrong.
It's just different. Throughout this course, I
am going to mean this PDF. Okay. What do I want to find? I'm going to assume that X has a gamma distribution with
parameters alpha and beta, and I'm going to take
a positive constant C, and multiply Y times
C, oops, sorry, and define Y as c times X. I want to know the
distribution for Y. This is a pretty
simple transformation, and you might think
it's just busy work to show an example, but this is a transformation
we're going to need a lot when we're analyzing
data and doing statistics. Let's go. I've got
a function G of X, and it,s C times X. If I invert this, I get X equals G inverse of Y, which is Y over C. Using the
formula that we computed, which is to say that we take PDF for X and plug in the
inverse function, and also multiply by the absolute value
of the derivative of the inverse function,
we get this. Okay. Let's simplify this. Here, I'm just going to
rewrite what we have, and the first thing I
want to simplify, well, actually the first
thing I'll simplify is, I'll just drop that
absolute value, because C is positive. Now I want to look
at the indicator. The indicator says that Y over C is between zero and infinity. If you multiply through by C, because C is positive, it doesn't flip any inequalities. We get that this is equivalent to Y being between
zero and infinity. I do get to change this
indicator to say that Y is between zero and infinity
and here's the rest of it. Do you recognize
this distribution? Y, in this case has another
gamma distribution. The first parameter
is still alpha, and the second
parameter is beta over C. The moral of this story is, if you multiply a Gamma random
variable by a constant, and if you describe
and parameterize the gamma distribution as
we have in this course, then that constant ends up
under the second parameter. Next up, when you observe
a random variable, like that height of the person
you're going to measure, what do you expect to see? We're going to talk
about expectation in the next video.
I'll see you there.