The time has come to estimate and to stop
making crazy guesses. It totally makes sense if
you're trying to estimate the mean or average out there
in the entire population. That you should use
the sample mean or sample average of the
values in the sample, but what about parameters with not such an obvious
interpretation? For example, suppose we
have a random sample from the gamma distribution with
parameters alpha and beta? We want to estimate alpha. The mean of this distribution
is alpha over beta. We do know that X bar would be an unbiased estimator of
the mean alpha over beta, but how do we get at alpha? We can't just multiply by beta and return the
estimator for alpha, that is beta times
the sample mean, because beta is unknown
and you don't want to be giving out estimators
involving unknown quantities. Instead, here we're
going to use what is known as method of
moments estimation. Recall that our moments
for distributions are defined to be the
expected value of X, the expected value of X squared, X cubed, X to the fourth, the expected value
of X to the fifth. You get the idea. These are population or a
distribution moments. These are theoretical
quantities as opposed to averages that we take of
numbers in our dataset. Mu, the letter we're using for the population mean is always how we denote the
expected value of X, and this is a
probability-weighted average. X-bar is what we've been using
to denote our sample mean, which is the actual
average of the values in the population so it was natural to think about using X-bar as an estimator for mu, but now, we're going to
look at other moments. The expected value of
X squared is actually a probability-weighted average of the squares of all of the
values in the population. We can estimate this
using an actual average, a one over N times the sum of all N of our values squared. As a definition,
the kth population or distribution moment, we're going to
denote it by a mu_k, and we're going to
define it to be the expected value of X to the k. Now if you've ever
seen moments before, these are non-central moments. I just wanted to throw that out there for people wondering, but if you weren't
wondering, ignore that. The kth population moments are computed from the distribution, their theoretical quantities. We have counterparts
from our sample. The kth sample moment is
going to be the average of the values in our sample after each has been taken
to the kth power. This is the kind sample analog of the kth population or
distribution moments. The idea behind method of
moments estimators is to equate the two and solve
for the unknown parameter. As an example, let's go back to our exponential distribution. The first population
or distribution moment mu one is the
expected value of X. We know for this distribution, this is one over lambda. The first sample moment
is the sample mean. This is always true
no matter what distribution we're talking
about, and that's X bar. I'm going to set these equal, and that is a horrible
thing to write down. It really makes my skin crawl. The thing on the
right over here at the sample mean is
a random variable. The thing on the left is a fixed constant number
that we don't know. Lambda is a constant. It's not random. This makes no sense at all, but it's an intermediate
step for cleaner algebra. In fact, what we
should be saying is 1 over estimator or Lambda hat of Lambda is equal to X-bar within the hats following
everywhere, make things a mess. It's an intermediate step, but it doesn't make sense. We've equated the
sample moment and the population moment and we solve for the
unknown parameter. Then this is still an
egregious statement with a constant on the left and a
random variable on the right. But now that we're done with all the work and the algebra, we'll put a hat on it. The method of moments estimator
for Lambda is Lambda hat, which is a random variable. This is 1 over X-bar. Again, don't let anyone
catch you halfway through this computation equating
constants to random variables. Something you might be
wondering right now is if this estimator is an unbiased
estimator of Lambda. That is, if we take the
expected value of Lambda hat, which is the expected value of 1 over the sample mean
because that was our Lambda hat and
we could write the 1 over the sample mean as n
over the sum of the X's. Are we going to get Lambda? How do you do this expectation? One thing to note is that the expected value
of 1 over X-bar is not equal to 1 over the
expected value of X-bar. This isn't even true for a
single random variable X, and the reason is because
the expected value of 1 over X or 1 over X-bar or whatever
you're talking about, is the integral of 1
over X times a PDF, and that is not one over the
integral of X times the PDF. Integrals just don't
work that way. I still have the question as to whether or not our Lambda hat, which we defined to
be 1 over X-bar, is an unbiased
estimator for Lambda. Again, I rewrote it as
n over the sum of the X's and I can call the sum of the x's a
new random variable Y, Y being the sum of NIID
exponentials with rate Lambda, we already know has
a Gamma distribution with parameters n and Lambda. This is now a
one-dimensional thing and we need to find the
expected value of one over a Gamma random variable. If we write that out,
that's going to be, using the law of the
unconscious statistician, 1 over y times the PDF for
this gamma distribution. I can take this y over here and suck it in and combine it with the
y to the n minus 1, leaving me with a y_n minus 2. Then if I look at the y part of this
ignoring the constants, this appears to look
like another Gamma PDF. It appears if you go back and compare it to the
original Gamma PDF, which had an x_Alpha
minus 1, e_Beta x. We have y's instead of x's, and appears that Alpha is
actually already n minus 1, so that n minus 2
is Alpha minus 1. In other words, this
appears to be the PDF for a Gamma distribution with parameters n minus 1 and Lambda, but it's not quite right because of the
constants out front. Let's put in and take out what we need and balance and compensate. Now, I've written it as some
stuff out front times an integral of a Gamma PDF and
we know this integral is one, so we have that the
expected value of our estimator Lambda
hat turns out to be n times Lambda
times Gamma of n minus 1 over Gamma of n. Our
expectation of our estimator is n times Lambda times Gamma
of n minus 1 divided by Gamma of n. Recall that for an integer n
in the Gamma function, we can rewrite gamma of n as n minus 1 times
Gamma of n minus 1, and we can cancel the
Gammas of n minus 1 now and we're left with
n over n minus 1 Lambda, which unfortunately
is not Lambda. Our first method of moments estimator is not
actually unbiased. It did turn out to
be a common sense estimator because this was the exponential distribution
with rate Lambda, and the mean of that
distribution is one over Lambda. Maybe the estimator should be one over the
mean of the sample. This is a nice
common sense thing, and now we have a
certain amount of rigor around that to justify it, a method of moments estimator. My question now is, can we find an estimator
for Lambda based on the sample mean in the exponential distribution that actually is unbiased for Lambda? I think we can. Our
expectation of 1 over X bar turned out to be n
over n minus 1 times Lambda. If I take this equation
over here and multiply both sides by n minus 1 over n and pull it in the expectation, then I'm going to cancel
the n stuff out of the right-hand side of the
equation and we'll get Lambda, and that's what we wanted to see. In here, we have an unbiased
estimator for lambda, which can be manipulated, simplified to look like n minus 1 over the sum of the X's. We found an unbiased estimator for the exponential distribution, and we did it by using our first formal method,
method of moments. It wasn't unbiased, but we manipulated it and got
something that was unbiased. Let's now do a two
parameter example. Suppose we have X_1 through X n, a random sample from
the gamma distribution with parameters Alpha and Beta. The first distribution or population moment Mu 1 is
the expected value of X, which you'll recall
is Alpha over Beta. The first sample moment, which we call M_1 is always
the sample mean X bar. I'm going to equate these and
cringe again because I've got constants on the left and
random stuff on the right, but this isn't an
intermediate step. We don't want to drag all those
hats through the algebra, but I do have a problem here. I want to solve for Alpha and
if I try to solve for it, I'll get Beta X bar, but Beta is unknown so this
isn't a good estimator. In general, when you have
multiple parameters, you're going to need
multiple moments equated. Let's look at the second moment. The second moment Mu 2 for the gamma distribution
is defined to be the expected
value of X squared. You could find this by integrating X squared in
front of the gamma PDF. Or you could look at maybe your tabulated [inaudible] of
distributional things, and unravel the
definition of variance, which is the expected
value of X squared minus the expected
value of X all squared. Unravel that to figure out
the expected value of X squared using a mean and
variance that you could look up. I'm going to equate this to
the second sample moment, which is the average of the
squared values in my sample. I have another equation. Overall, we have two equations and we want to solve
for Alpha and Beta. I'm going to rewrite
this term here. I'm going to pull out a 1 over
Beta from the first term, and then I have an Alpha over Beta and Alpha over Beta squared. Since that's equal to X bar,
I'm going to plug them in. Equating this to be the
second sample moment, 1 over n times the sum
of the X i squared, we can now solve for Beta
and throw a hat on it before anyone sees
us running around with a constant equated
to a random variable. We have an estimator for Beta, and I'm going to go back up
to this top equation here and plug that in and
solve for Alpha, and we have an estimator
for Alpha as well. This concludes Module 1. Congratulations for
making it this far. In Module 2, we're going
to spend the entire time talking about maximum
likelihood estimators, which are the
workhorse estimators of statistical estimation. They have better
properties than method of moments estimators and they're going to be very useful to us. Then we'll compute a few
maximum likelihood estimators of parameters of distributions
that we've sampled from, and also compute method
of moments estimators to compare the two types of
estimators. I'll see you there.