When you go and measure
people on the street, do you have a certain expectation
about what you'll find? For a random variable x, the expectation or
expected value or mean, and these are all synonyms
for the same thing, it's just a probability weighted average of the values
in the distribution. In the discrete case, let's just work it out on
our own without a formula. Suppose that x has this very simple distribution where it takes on the values one, two, and three, with
probabilities 1/4, 1/4 and 1/2. The expected value or mean of x, we're going to denote
by a capital E of x, and it's just as I said, this probability weighted average where we take each value
in the distribution, and multiply by its
respective probability. Even though the number 2
is in the center here, the number 3 has half of the weight of this
distribution on it. The average is pulled
away from the center, and pulled more up towards three. That's why we get the 2.25. In general, for a
discrete random variable, we write the expected
value of X as the sum of x times the
probability that X equals x. This probability of course, is our probability mass function, which we have denoted
by an f of x. When you write it this way, you can easily see the analog to a continuous distribution. The sum, will turn
into an integral. The PMF, probability
mass function, will be replaced by a PDF,
probability density function. Common notation for the
mean or expected value of a random variable or
equivalently its distribution, is to use a lowercase Greek mu. This is a constant in
that it is not random. X is a random variable here, and we have integrated
out all the randomness. As usual in the case of multiple random variables
or distributions, we might subscript the mu
to give several means. For example, suppose that X has the normal
distribution with mean mu, and variance sigma squared. I would hope the mean
or expected value of this distribution is mu, otherwise we have a very bad name of this distribution mean mu, and we've used the wrong symbol. But the expected
value, let's see, is the integral from
minus infinity to infinity of x times the PDF, and the PDF is this. Now, I'm just trying to talk about expectations
of this video, I don't want to talk about how
to do integrals right now, and I don't want you
to be concerned, but if you or someone cranked
through this integral, you do in fact get mu. As another example,
let's talk about the exponential
distribution that I introduced several videos ago. At the time, I said
that I didn't like the notation I was using to denote this exponential
distribution, this x squiggly line, x lambda. Now, I can tell you why I
don't like that notation. The expected value of this continuous random
variable is of course, the integral of x times the PDF. Now, I've put the integral from minus infinity to
infinity in here, even though this
distribution lives on the space from
zero to infinity, just to show that you can always do it and you
wouldn't be wrong, it's just that part of your integral is going to
end up to be zero. Integrating the rest of
this, the interesting part, using integration by parts, we get one over lambda. At the beginning of this module, I talked about the exponential
distribution being a popular model of
inter-arrival times. Maybe you're examining
traffic flow at a certain intersection and
you want to talk about the times between
arrivals of vehicles, or the times between customers
walking into a bank, or the times between particles colliding in a physics setting, or the times between packets of information moving
along in the Internet. If our exponential
distribution had, for example, a rate of two per hour, so by this I mean lambda is two, imagine if customers come into your store at a rate
of two per hour, and x is the inter-arrival time, the amount of time
you have to wait on average for a customer. If they're only coming
in at two per hour, you would fully
expect on average, it would take a half hour
between customers to arrive. You're seeing this
inverse relationship between the rate, and the mean. We use lambda as a rate, and one over lambda turned out to be the mean of the distribution. Yet some people use
lambda in the other way. If we have an exponential
distribution like this, as we have written, where
the mean is one over lambda, we say that lambda
is a rate parameter. Other people, and it's
not wrong at all, will write the
distribution like this. They have a one over lambda
where we had a lambda, and their mean or expected
value turned out to be lambda. Here we say that lambda
is a mean parameter. When people just write X, X has this squiggly line
exponential distribution lambda, it's hard to tell which
one they're talking about. Often if you're reading
a paper or a book, or you're on some website, you're going to
have to go back up, flip back, scroll back, and try to figure out which exponential distribution
you're talking about. For this reason, I like to use this more specific
notation where I specifically write,
rate versus mean. Suppose that X has a PDF
or PMF, F sub x of x, and g is a function and I'm
going to assume it's nice, although I don't need
it for this result, I just need it for
the method of proof. I want to figure out the
expected value of g of X. This result that we're
going to get is going to hold in both the discrete
and continuous cases. But I'm only going to prove
it in the continuous cases. You're going to see integrals where otherwise you
would have seen sums. I'm going to define a
new random variable Y to be g of capital X. This is a random variable and it has a distribution and
it has an expectation. We already figured
out the PDF for this, and so if I want the
expected value of g of X, that is the expected value of Y that's the integral
of Y against its PDF, and we have an
expression or we have an exact expression for the PDF for y in terms of the PDF for X. We're going to plug it
in. To go forward here, I'm going to leave
out two details. One is what I'm doing
with this absolute value. Remember, if g is invertible, it has to be either strictly increasing or
strictly decreasing. This means in turn
that the inverse is strictly increasing
or strictly decreasing. That means that this
derivative is either strictly positive or
strictly negative. To do this integral, I would
break it up into two cases, and I would say case 1, g inverse is increasing, the derivative is positive and I would drop
the absolute value. Case 2, the derivative is
negative because the inverse is decreasing and I would drop the absolute value and put a negative in front to
turn it positive, which is what we have
with the absolute value. I'm going to do a
substitution here. I'm going to let x
be g inverse of y, and then the
differential dx is going to be the derivative
of g inverse of y, dy. When you plug it in and
simplify everything, you get to this. I skipped two things here. One of them was the
details involving the absolute value that
we've already talked about, and the other are details on
the limits of integration. If you're doing a
change of variables to turn one integral into another, you do have to watch
out and see if the limits of integration
are going to change as well. What if X takes on values
from minus infinity to infinity that when you put them through
the function g, you only get values between 0-1. The reason it's still okay to use minus infinity to
infinity is because of this PDF for X that will have
the limits built into it. Just like we saw a few slides ago with the exponential
distribution, this will be defined to be
something interesting on some region and zero
on the other region. This formula right
here is known as the law of the
unconscious statistician. Now, I always thought this was the most ridiculous
name because I don't think anyone is doing statistics while
they're unconscious, but let's say they are. The reason it's called
this is because it's finding an expectation without really thinking about it. If you have a random variable
or a distribution with a random variable
X associated and you want to find the
expected value of g of X, that's a new distribution, that's a new random variable. You should use the PDF for the new distribution like we did and then we
transformed it. But some people just
jump straight to this, which is really convenient. You put the g of x in front of the PDF for the original
x and integrate. People do this without thinking, and it's known as the law of the unconscious statistician. I just know it as
something super convenient because I don't want to have to transform PDFs all the time. Let's go back to our
discrete example and try our law of the
unconscious statistician. I have a discrete
random variable x taking on the values 1, 2, and 3 with probabilities
1/4, 1/4, and 1/2. If I want to find the
expected value of X squared, then I need to square each value times its respective probability, and I get 3.5. In the continuous case, let's look at the
exponential again. I just went through all
of this discussion to talk about the notation I'm going to use and then I
failed to use it here. But this, I mean an
exponential with rate lambda. If I want the expected
value of X squared, I'll put X squared in front
of the PDF and integrate. Doing two integrations by parts, I will end up with 2
over lambda squared. In the case that you want to
find the expected value of a function of two or even
more random variables, you would put that function in front of the joint PDF and do a double or triple or
however many variables you have integral. We're going to use this
as an important tool for proving some important
properties about expectation. The first is that expectation
is a linear operator. This means if you have
random variables X and Y, and you take a constant, a and b and you multiply them
by constants and add them, that you can run the expectation through the sum and
pull the constants out. How do we prove this? The thing on the left side
here is a function of X and Y, so that's like your g of x, y in the top line. We're going to write it
with lowercase letters in integral in front
of the joint PDF, and where we're going to
do a double integral. Now, we're simply going to use linearity of the integral that's going to pull
this apart for us. Then over here, if you pull the x out of this inner integral, then you're integrating the
joint PDF with respect to y and that gives you
the marginal PDF for X. Once you do that, you're going to get at
least the first term of this big sum. You're going to get a times
the integral of x times the marginal PDF for x and that is a times the
expected value of X. For the other term in this sum, you will have to interchange the order of integration first. But doing the same
thing, you're going to pull the b out of the x integral and then integrate with respect to y to get the
expected value of Y. Another thing we can prove
with our new joint PDF g of x y formula for the expectation is this nice
property about independence. If X and Y are independent
random variables, then the expected value
of a product like this will break up into a
product of expectations. Let's prove it, X times Y is a function of two
random variables, X and Y. It's like the G of X and Y
from the previous slide. I just want to put it in
front of the joint PDF for x and y and do a double integral. Because X and Y are independent, I do know that this
joint PDF factors into two marginal PDFs
and now I can move things around my inner
integral is with respect to y. I'm going to pull the x
out and also the f of x out, and then what I'm
left with is the integral of y times f of y dy, which is the expected value of Y. That new constant I can pull
outside of the whole thing, and we get the expected value of Y times an integral that looks like the
expected value of X. As before, these results, these claims I'm making
about properties of expectations also hold for
discrete random variables. We're just proving them
in the continuous cases. By the way, if random variables
X and Y are independent, and you look at the
expected value of a product of not
just X and Y alone, but a product of a function
of X and a function of Y, this will break apart into an expectation times
an expectation. The proof is identical
to what we saw before. The integral we had on the previous slide does
replace the little x and little y with the
g of x and h of y and move things around,
it's identical. Another important
thing is that I want to mention that although when
x and y are independent, the expected value of the product is the product of
the expected values. The reverse is not
necessarily true. Let's look at an example, this is not the usual
three-point example from this lesson, it's
a little different. X is taking the
values minus 1, 0, and 1 with respective
probabilities 1/4, 1/2, and 1/4. The expected value of x, in this case, is zero. I didn't show the
calculation here, but it's just minus 1 times 1/4, plus 0 times 1/2, plus 1 times 1/4. I'm going to bring
another random variable Y into this problem. But because the expected
value of X is zero, the expected value of X times the expected value of
Y is going to be zero. As long as the
expected value of Y is not something
weird and infinite. I specifically, I'm going to
define Y to be X squared. This is really darn
dependent on X. These are not independent at all. The expected value of
X times Y, though, can be written as
the expected value of X times X squared, which is X cubed. We can use the law of the
unconscious statistician to do in this case, a sum because it's discreet. We're going to take each
value and cube it and multiply it by its
respective probability. We're getting that the
expected value of X times Y is zero and expected
value of X is zero, and expected value of Y up
here I don't even care about. I know that both sides
of the equation, expected value of
X times Y equals expected value of X times
expected value of Y, they're both zero and
yet in this case, X and Y are very dependent. Remember, if X and
Y are independent, you can factor expectations. You also maybe it will affect your expectations
sometimes when they're not independent so it's not an if and only
if kind of thing. Next up, we're
going to talk about the spread of the distribution. Are the values generated
or the heights measured? Are they all clumping up in one place or are they
really spread out? Are they highly predictable or are they all over the place? We'll figure this out and how
to measure this next time.