Welcome back. We are still, believe it or not, trying to estimate things from
a larger population based on a sample. So we take that sample and we compute quantities that might
help us with the larger population. For example, maybe a sample mean, or maybe the sum of the values in
the sample, or maybe the variants, or maybe the maximum value of the sample or
the minimum value in the sample. Or the max minus the min,
which is known as the range of the sample. Any function of your data
is known as a statistic. So all of these things I just talked
about, means, mins, maxes, sums, and variances, sample variances,
that is, are statistics. And we're going to use them
to estimate other things. And in order to figure
out how well we're doing, we're going to need to know often the
distributions of some of these statistics. A lot of them depend on sums, so
we're going to start out by talking about the distribution of sums
of random variables. As a first example, consider that X1
through Xn are IID, independent and identically distributed,
which means the exact same thing as a random sample from the Bernoulli
distribution with parameter p. I want to know the distribution of
the sum of the x's from 1 to n, and I'm going to call this
new random variable, Y. So this one, I think,
we might be able to figure out. The Bernoulli distribution, remember,
is a bunch of ones and zeros, and we have independent Bernoulli's,
that's one of the I's in IID. So we've got independent ones and
zeros with probabilities p and 1-p. So what happens if you sum them up? Well, if you think of the ones as
success and zeros as failures, then summing up the zeros and ones will
give you the total number of ones, which is the total number of successes. And this is a binomial distribution. So this one was kind of guessable. If we start with a random sample from
a Bernoulli distribution with parameter p, then the sum is binomial
with parameters n and p, where n is the number
of terms we summed up. So not all statistics have such
obvious interpretations, so we're going to need some tools. The first thing I want to talk about is
something known as a moment generating function. We're going to denote it by a capital M,
and I'm going to use a sub X, but I don't need to. As per our previous discussions, this is useful if we have maybe two moment
generating functions in the same problem, one for a random variable X and another
for Y, then I would put the subscript on. So t is just a real number argument,
and it's defined to be the expected value of e to the tX
in the discrete or continuous case. The moment generating function has this
name because it generates moments. So what are moments? Moments are expectations like this, the expected value of X,
X squared, X cubed, on up. Now, I want to get back to our course in
statistics and get to some actual data. So because I don't think we're going to be
needing these moments, at least not for a while, I don't want to talk about how
the moment generating function generates them, even though that's how the moment
generating function gets its name. Instead, I want to talk about what is
right now a more important property, and that is that moment generating functions
uniquely determine the distribution. So here I've written out
a moment generating function for a continuous distribution. If it was a discrete distribution,
this would be a sum. And you can see that the moment
generating function is written in terms of an integral involving the PDF,
or a sum of a PMF. Now, how do we identify distributions? If you have a random variable X and you
can compute its PDF and it matches that of the exponential distribution, then you say
that you have an exponential distribution. So PDFs are enough for
us to identify the distribution. Because of this relationship here,
it's actually possible to invert this relationship and write down the PDF in
terms of the moment generating function. This is really hard,
we don't want to actually do it. And if you've ever heard
of Laplace transforms, think inverse Laplace transforms, and you
may have seen something like this already. But if you believe me when I say this,
then if I have two random variables X and Y, and I compute the moment
generating function for X and the moment generating function for
Y, and they're the same. They're going to have
the exact same distribution. So as an example of computing
a moment generating function, let's look at our Bernoulli case again. So the moment generating function
is defined to be this expectation, which is a sum over all the x of e to the
tx times the probability mass function, which is the probability that X equals x. For this distribution, we only take
on two values for X, zero and one. So if we write this out and multiply
things out and start adding, we get this. Now, the e to the 0 is 1 and
e to the t is t. And because the probability
that X equals 1 is p and X equals 0 is 1 minus p,
we get this, or this. We have found our first moment generating
function, and it's defined for any t. It's important for moment generating functions to at least be
defined on a neighborhood including zero. So if you're wondering how a moment
generating function might not be defined, if this sum was an infinite sum,
it might diverge for some values of t and converge to
something for other values of t. And if it converges,
then we have a moment generating function. And it's important that we
at least get convergence for values of t in a neighborhood of zero. So as another example,
let's look at the binomial distribution. This is again discreet, and so the
expectation of e to the tx is the sum of e to the tx times the probabilities for
the binomial, which you see right here. And I've got an e to the tx. And when you raise something to
a power and then to another power, you get to multiply the exponents,
and vice versa. So I can rewrite that e to the tx
as e to the t raised to the x, and then I can put it together
with the p to the x so I have that one term raised to the x. So to sum this up, I'm going to have
you recall the binomial theorem from somewhere way back in your
mathematical studies. And this says that if you're adding
two real numbers, a plus b, and taking that to the nth power, you can write it as the sum of this
combinatorics involving expression. In our case, if you look at the line above
a is pe to the t and b is 1 minus p. So from that, we can use the binomial
theorem and we've got the sum, which gives us the moment generating
function for the binomial distribution. So now we know two moment
generating functions. What are we going to do with it? Well, suppose that X1 through
Xn is a random sample, or IID, from any distribution with a moment
generating function M sub X. So if you ever see me talk about an X
when really I have an X1 through Xn The X is meant to be a typical X, but there would be nothing wrong
with me writing M sub X sub 1. Or even m sub X sub 5 because they
all have the same distribution and therefore the moment generating functions. Which are expectations which are computed
using probability, mass function. Or probability density functions
are going to be exactly the same. Let's talk about the distribution
of the some of these general random variables that are no
longer just Bernoulli. The moment generating function for this new random variable Y is e
to the tY in the expectation. And this is the expectation of t times,
the some of the X's. And we can pull that tea inside
the some and then the each. The sum is the same thing
as a product of ease. So now we've got the expected
value of the product as I goes from 1 to n of
e to the t times X i. Now we already saw in an earlier
lesson that if we have two functions of a different
random variables in a product. If they're independent random variables,
then we can break up the expectation. And here we're just doing that
kind of on steroids, right? We have a product of end things and we
have the product inside the expectation. And we get to take the products
of the individual expectations. And this is by independence
of the random variables. Because we get that from random sampling. And it's not true in general. So these expectations are all
the same because I'm not saying the X's are all the same. They're certainly not, but
on average, they're the same. They're expected to be the same, and expected values of functions
of them are the same. Because you compute it just by using
the common p d f that's common to all. So what you're seeing here is the moment
generating function for one of them. And we've got that multiplied
by itself and times. So we get the moment
generating function or one of them raised to the end power. So to conclude, if we have X1
through X n a random sample or I'd from some distribution with
a moment generating function. That I will recall M or
M sub X or M sub X sub 1. It's just supposed to be a typical one for
that sample. Okay, so to sum up,
we have a random sample of size n. In other words, X 1 through X n ii d. From some distribution and we're going to let i be the sum as
I goes from 1 to n if their iid. We have just seen that the moment
generating function of the sum. Is the moment generating function of
one of them raised to the nth power. So let's see if we can use this to tell us
something back to the Bernoulli example. Suppose that X 1 through
X n a random sample or iid from the Bernoulli
distribution with parameter p. And consider the new random variable Y which is the sum of the X's
as I goes from 1 to n. We want to know the distribution of Y and
in fact we've already figured this out. But let's see how moment generating
functions could help us figure it out as an alternative. The moment generating function for
the Bernoulli we already computed. And it was 1 minus p plus p e to the t. And so
the moment generating function for Y. Because this is some of my i i d things
is just going to be the moment generating function. For any one of these
raised to the n th power. So I plugged in that moment generating
function and what do we see? We see the moment generating function for the binomial distribution
with parameters n,p. And my statement before about
moment generating functions uniquely determining
the distribution says that. If Y has the moment generating
function of the binomial distribution with parameters n and p. Then Y actually has to
have the distribution, the binomial distribution
with parameters n and p? Now lets pretty neat. So let's talk about a continuous case. Suppose that X 1 through X n is
a random sample from the exponential distribution with rate lambda. First, I want to find the moment
generating function for the individual X's. So that we can use it to find the
distribution of another some in this case. The sum of exponential. So just looking at a single exponential,
the expected value of e to the t x. Or X1 in this case is going to
be the integral now in general, from minus infinity to infinity. Although you might be saying doesn't
this only go from 0 to infinity and you're right. But right now I just have the p d f in
there and the p d f will cut us off. And make us only integrate
over the correct region. Because the p d f is defined to
be 0 when the X's are negative. So we do get the integral
from 0 to infinity and there's the exponential p d f. And to do this integral, I'm going to pull
those e's together and factor out the X. And we have an integral that we could do. It's not that hard, but
I have a trick for you and that is if you forget
the constant out front. And just kind of look at this
function just the X part, it kind of looks like the p d f
of an exponential distribution. With parameter lambda minus t. Now the lambda minus t for it to be a parameter of the exponential
distribution must be greater than 0. Because the parameter for the exponential
distribution are always not negative. Always actually positive. So in this case, what would happen
if lambda minus t were negative? This moment generating
function wouldn't even exist. The whole integral would blow up. So assuming that t is less than lambda,
which makes this lambda minus t positive. And makes the whole integral nice and
convergent. I think this looks like an exponential
with rate lambda minus t. So let's put in the lambda minus
t that we need to see out front. And kind of compensate forward
by pulling out this lambda and dividing by lambda minus t. So we really didn't change anything. So now we've got the integral
of an exponential p d f with parameter lambda minus t and
all p d f 's integrate to one. So we've got lambda over lambda minus t. And again, this works only
when t is less than lambda. But lambda is strictly positive. So we do have t' s,
including a neighborhood of 0. I call this trick integrating
without integrating. The more probability and
statistics you do. The more PDFs you become aware of and the more integral that are not even
from probability or statistics. You can maybe mash into a form where
you know an integral would be 1. And you don't actually
have to do the work. Okay, so let's find one more
moment generating function. And then we'll talk about
the distribution of the some of the X's. So remember that we're trying to find the
distribution of the sum of exponential. And we're in this moment
generating function section. So I suspect we're going to use them
if we have an i i d exponential. The moment generating
function of that sum. Is equal to the moment
generating function for any one of them raised to the end power. Now, if we have any possibility
of recognizing this. I think we're going to need a few more
moment generating functions under our belts. Consider X 1 through X n ID
from the gamma distribution with parameters alpha and beta. The moment generating function in this
case is the expected value of e to the t Capital X, which is the integral of e
to the tX in front of the gamma pdf. And we're integrating over 0 to
infinity because that's where the gamma pdf is not 0. So I've got two es here, and
I'm going to combine them. I'm on my way to another one of these
integrating without integrating tricks here. And you'll see that I pulled
the constants out front because my goal here is to avoid the integral. But my goal in doing that is
to recognize what kind of distribution this might be a pdf for. And this appears to look
kind of like a gamma pdf. It's not quite right, but it appears to be gamma with
parameters alpha and beta minus t. So, just like our discussion for
the exponential distribution, the second parameter, both parameters for the gamma
distribution have to be positive. So this is a proper gamma distribution
if beta minus t is positive. In order for
it to be that gamma distribution, I will put in what I need in front of it,
right in place of beta. In the whole beta pdf,
we have beta minus t. And the alpha is just alpha. And to write this down,
I needed to put some things in, and I compensated by putting
some things out front so that the the expression is exactly
what it is in the line above. And then so this integral is
the integral of a gamma pdf with parameters alpha and beta minus t. It has to integrate to
1 because it's a pdf. So it does and this says that the moment
generating function for the gamma random variable any one of them is beta over
beta minus t, all raised to the alpha. So this holds again for t less than beta. Otherwise, the integral
would have blown up. So take our X1 through Xn, iid exponential
with rate lambda and add them up. What is the distribution of the sum? So I'm going to let y be
the sum from 1 to n of the Xi, we know the moment generating function for
any one of these Xs. And because they're iid Xs
the moment generating function for the sum is the moment generating function
for one of them to the nth power. So I plugged it in. And what do you see? If you go back and look at the moment
generating function of the gamma distribution, you'll see that we
really got the gamma distribution with parameters n in place of alpha and
lambda in place of beta. Because moment generating functions
uniquely determine the distribution, we have now shown that the sum of n
iid exponential random variables with some rate lambda has a gamma distribution. Where the first parameter is
the number of things we added up and the second parameter, is the parameter
from the exponential distribution. Now not all random variable sum up
to a nice known named distribution. So you can always take the sum
of random variables and that's your new random variable. But it might not be one from our list
of kind of common ones we've been lucky so far. And we can be lucky some more. We did show that the sum of iid
Bernoulli's is binomial with parameters n and p. We showed that the sum of
n iid exponentials with rate lambda is gamma with parameters n and
lambda and we could use the same procedure
to show a few others. So one of them is that the some of
m not to be confused with the n, the sum of m iid binomial random
variables with parameters n and p. We could show that this is again binomial
with parameter n times m and then p. We could also show that
the sum of n iid gamma random variables is another type of gamma. And in this case, we end up
multiplying n by the alpha parameter. And this is not that surprising, right? Because the gamma random variable
can come from a sum of exponentials. So if you're summing up gammas, you're really summing up
a whole lot of exponentials. So I would expect another gamma. In other news, the sum of normal
random variables is again normal. And in fact, any linear combination
of normal random variables is normal. They don't even have to be independent. Now we haven't shown that yet, but
that's going to be important for us going forward. We also have that,
if I take X1 through Xn independent but not identically distributed. So here they are all normal, which kind of sounds like
they're identically distributed. But they're different normals with
different means and different variances. And if you add them up,
you get another normal, and you can show this using
moment generating functions. And the mean of the mu sum of
random variables is the sum of the original means, and the variance
is the sum of the original variances. And that part kind of comes from,
if you'll recall, we talked about the variance of
a sum being the sum of the variance, if the random variables are independent. For one more normal case here,
if we have a bunch of independent random variables from different
normal distributions and we want to look not just at the sum but
at a linear combination. So summing them up with all of these
coefficients in here we still get another normal distribution, and we could show
this with moment generating functions. And as long as you
remember that any linear combination of normal random
variables is again normal, then you don't have to memorize
these means and variances. Because they are exactly what
you would get if you took the expectation of that sum and
the variance of the sum. So the mean and the variance for
the distribution is the mean and the variance of the random variable y. So are you ready to estimate? So far, we've had a few common
sense estimators, guesses, things that seemed like good ideas,
things that seem like natural ideas. We're going to estimate the mean of the
population with the mean in the sample. We're going to finish out this module,
though, with our first formal,
not just guessing method of estimation. It's called method of moments,
and you don't want to miss it. I'll see you next time.