Hello everybody.
In the last video, we talked about
continuous distributions and the concept of a probability density
function or PDF. We also named some very important
continuous distributions and then I sent you off
to do a little reading, naming other continuous
distributions in there. Well, there's one in
there that you read about that is so
important that I thought we should come back and
talk about it a little bit more in its own special video, and that is the
Gamma distribution. If you have a random
variable X that is continuous with this PDF, which looks a
little complicated, I'm going to explain what
all these symbols are, then we say that X has
a Gamma distribution. There are two parameters
in here, Alpha and Beta. Alpha is known as a shape parameter for reasons
that we're going to see in a few slides and we're going to talk about
Beta in the next slide. But I do want to point out that the X part of this
PDF, over here, is really the function and then this other
stuff is just constants. They might look a little scary but they're
just constants. We're going to define them and just hold on for a moment, and bear with me. If X has this Gamma
distribution and this PDF, I'm going to write
X squiggly line has the distribution of capital
Gamma, Alpha, Beta. Then you notice there's also
a capital Gamma up here, and that stands for
something different. When the capital Gamma
has two parameters in it, it is describing the
name of a distribution. When the capital Gamma
has one parameter in it, this is a constant. It's actually a
function known as the Gamma function with the
value Alpha plugged in. Again, we're going to
define it momentarily. Before going on and defining and naming
the Beta parameter, I did want to point
out that some people parameterized the Gamma
distribution differently. Some books, some websites, some other professors
you might come across, if they say that X squiggly line has the distribution
Gamma, Alpha, Beta, they might actually mean that they're
talking about this PDF. You can see the Betas are all flipped from where
we have the Betas. This is slightly
different and it can cause you trouble if you
are looking in a textbook, or a website, or
a professor that uses one notation
over the other. When people write
X squiggly line has the distribution Gamma, Alpha, Beta, I will always mean this. I'm never going to bring
this one up again, but you should be aware that other people might
be using that. We said that Alpha is a shape parameter for reasons
about to be explained. If you use this
parameterization, Beta is known as a
scale parameter. As you increase it
and decrease it, it takes the shape of the
distribution, squishes it, and raises it, lowers it, and flattens it, and it
re-scales the distribution. If you're using our
parameterization for the Gamma PDF, Beta is known as an
inverse scale parameter. For this course,
is not important to be able to name
the parameter, we're just going to say X has a Gamma distribution with
parameters Alpha and Beta. Again, we are always
going to mean this PDF and we're never
going to use this PDF. I've been calling Alpha
a shape parameter. To look at the shape
of the distribution, let's just ignore the constants. If you have a function and
you're multiplying it by 100, you have the same
shape function. Just everything is re-scaled. Both parameters, Alpha and Beta, have to be positive and if Alpha is actually
greater than one and you look at most of the Gamma PDF barring the
constant sitting out front, you can see that when
Alpha is greater than one, we have X to a
positive power times e to a negative X with
a constant in front. That means that when X is zero, because of this X, the function is going
to evaluate to zero, and it's going to be tied down here, if you look at a plot. It's then going to go
up as X increases, and we get X to the power
getting larger and larger. But eventually the e to
the negative X part is going to overtake the
exponent on the X, and bring it back down to zero. If we play with the Alpha
and the Beta parameters, we can shift this
distribution around, we can move the lump, we can change which
direction it is skewed in, and we're going to see many different shapes for the Gamma distribution
going forward. Let's look at this distribution, again, when Alpha equals 1. If Alpha equals 1, we have X to the Alpha minus 1, which is X to the 0, which is 1. The PDF becomes e
to the minus Beta X and yes I dropped some
constants in the front. But e to the minus Beta X
is an exponential curve. When you plug in X equals 0, the e to the zero becomes one. We're going to start
at some height, that's going to be given by the constants that I
have missing out here, and we're going to go down
exponentially like this. Finally, since the parameter
Alpha needs to be positive, we've talked about it
being greater than one, and now being equal to 1, what happens if
it's less than one? If it's less than one, then X to the Alpha minus one
is X to a negative power, which is like 1 over X
to a positive power. This means, as X
gets very very tiny, we have a fraction that is blowing up and
going to infinity. In fact the PDF
has an asymptote. It runs right up the y-axis
and goes up to infinity. When alpha is greater than 1, equal to 1 or less than 1, and it always by default has
to be greater than zero, we get three distinct
shapes of the distribution. So far I've been ignoring
the constants in the front. In particular, I want to talk
about this function here, which is known as
the Gamma function. Now again, if you
see a capital Gamma, alpha comma beta, we're referring to the name
of the distribution. But if you see a
capital Gamma of just a single
variable like this, then it is something
different known as a gamma function.
Let's define it. The gamma function is defined
as this integral here, and we can't really do this in closed form unless
alpha is an integer, then we might be
able to get at it with several
integration by parts. Note however, that this integral is identical
to this integral. If you wanted to do this
second integral here, you might make a u substitution, and if you let u be beta times x and rewrite the integral
because Beta is positive, the limits of integration will still be zero to infinity, and you're going to get
plugging in the u's, you're basically
going to get this integral with U's in it. Try it if you don't believe me, but these are the
exact same integral, and when we write it this way, you can see that
this Gamma function, Let's go back up to the PDF. The gamma function
is precisely what we need to make the
PDF integrate to 1. It's not all that clever. I invite you to
take your favorite non-negative at
integrable function. Integrable, meaning if you
integrate it over some region, it actually converges
and is finite, and then after you integrate it, define that value to be a
constant named after you and put one over your
constant in front of the function and you've
created your own PDF. As bad as it looks,
it's just the constant that makes the
PDF integrate to 1. This Gamma function has several cool properties,
and in this video, I just wanted to touch on
three of them that are going to be important
for us in this course. The first is that when you evaluate it at one, you get one. In other words,
gamma of 1 equals 1. This is super easy to see. If you just plug one into
alpha for this integral, you get the integral
from zero to infinity of e to the minus x, and you have two choices; One is to do the relatively
simple integral. The other is to note that this
is a PDF in its own right. This is the exponential
with lambda equals 1. Because it's a PDF
on zero to infinity, when we integrate from zero to infinity, we know we get one. The second property I want
to talk about is if alpha, the real number alpha, which has to be positive, if it's greater than 1, then we can actually say
that gamma of alpha is equal to alpha minus 1 times
gamma of alpha minus 1. We get a recursive relationship which brings the argument
of the Gamma function down, and to show this, I would just write out
the gamma function as an integral and do
integration by parts. You may recall
integration by parts. If you're integrating
a u times dv, you get u times v minus
the integral of vdu. In this case, u is going to
be x to the alpha minus one, and dv is going to be
e to the minus x dx, and you would take du, which is going to
be Alpha minus 1, x to the Alpha minus 2, and you would
integrate dv to get negative e to the negative x dx. When you put these
back together using the integration
by parts formula, you get something
that looks like this. We need to evaluate
this first block from zero to infinity, so when x equals 0, this is certainly zero. When x is infinite, we did say that alpha has
to be greater than 1, so this x is blowing up, but the e is coming down and this whole
term goes to zero. It's really a limit rather than evaluating it at infinity, and if you need to
convince yourself of this then you would show it
using L'Hopital's rule. This other part has an
alpha minus 1 out front, and the rest of it looks like
the Gamma function again, except the alpha part
has come down by one. In other words, we have
precisely zero for this integral plus alpha minus 1 times gamma of alpha minus 1, and that's what we
wanted to show. As a final property
and there are many more properties
of the Gamma function. But as I said, these
are the important ones that we're going to be
using a lot in this course. If n is a positive integer, then we can use our
previous property to say that gamma of n is
n minus 1 factorial. Because n being a
positive integer, is also an Alpha, even though alpha can
be any real number, so by our previous property, we know that gamma of n is n minus 1 times gamma
of n minus 1, and applying that
recursive property again, we can write gamma of n
minus 1 as n minus 2, gamma of n minus 2. If we keep going down
until we hit gamma of 1, remember, we show that
gamma of 1 is equal to 1, and we eventually get n minus 1, n minus 2 all the way down
to one and a big product, and we write this as
n minus 1 factorial. Here's a really fun fact
about the Gamma distribution. We are going to prove this in about two videos when we have a little more
machinery behind us but it's so important
and so widely used in statistics that
I wanted to get you thinking about it right now. Suppose that X has the Gamma distribution
with parameters Alpha and Beta and c is a
positive constant. If you form a new
random variable Y by taking X and
multiplying by c, we will show that this still has a Gamma distribution and
the first parameter is unchanged and the second
parameter gets divided by that constant c be
careful if you're out there in the world reading papers and books and websites, people use two different
parameterizations for the Gamma distribution so this property might end up looking a little bit different. You might see someone tell
you that if you have a Gamma, Alpha, Beta random
variable and you multiply by a constant c, that you get a new random
variable that is Gamma Alpha, c times Beta and that
means they're using the other way to write
down the Gamma PDF, which I'm not going to
mention again because I don't want anyone
to get confused. We're going to talk about one Gamma PDF for
this entire course. At the beginning of this video, I said that we were going
into the Gamma distribution because it is so important in statistics and that is not exactly true and
yet completely true. The distribution that I really
want to get at is known as a chi-squared
distribution but it turns out this chi-squared
distribution is just a special case of the Gamma distribution
and that's why we just spent so much time on the Gamma distribution so
using our parameterizations, if we have a random variable X that has the Gamma
distribution with parameters n over
two and one-half, where n is a positive integer. Then we say that this
Gamma distribution, it has its own special name. It's known as a
chi-squared distribution with n as a parameter
to affect the shape of the distribution and this
parameter is known as a degrees of freedom parameter and eventually later
in this course, in the second half
of this course, we will learn why it's called that
and what degrees of freedom means but right now, it's just something
that's changing the shape of the distribution
is just a parameter. We're going to write
x squiggly line has the distribution of
capital chi squared of n. The chi-squared
distribution comes up all of the time in statistics and often it allows us to unify different
areas of statistics. If we have different
distributions of things that we
might be estimating, we can maybe transform them into chi-squared distributions
and we will know a lot about the chi-squared distribution as the course goes on so we'll know a lot about
the things we're estimating. Let's do a quick example
about how we might transform a random variable into a
chi-squared random variable. Most often, this is going to mean that we're starting
with some sort of Gamma distribution so suppose that a random variable X has a Gamma distribution with the first parameter Alpha
being a positive integer n, and the second parameter being a generic positive
real number Beta. I would like to make some adjustments to
X to turn it into a chi-squared random
variable so I want this first parameter
to be n over two and the second
parameter to be one-half. Remember what we just
talked about a moment ago. If you multiply a Gamma random variable times
a positive constant, you still get a Gamma
distribution and it ends up under the
second parameter. I want this Beta to be a one-half so I want
two things to happen. Number 1, I want to
get rid of the Beta. I'm going to multiply
by Beta and it will go under this Beta,
canceling the Beta. That would give me a Gamma n,1. I'm not quite there and close. I want an n, 1/2 so not only am I going
to multiply it by Beta, but I'm also going
to multiply it by two so this two Beta is
going to come under here, and the Betas will cancel
and we get a Gamma n, 1/2. How do we get the first
parameter to be n/2? Well, we don't quite
get it to be n/2, but note that we can write
it as 2n/2 and now this is the definition of the
chi-squared distribution with 2n degrees of freedom. Now it's okay if you
don't fully grasp, but at this point or
if it looks scary, you're going to see it so much. You are going to become really used to this and
it's going to be no big deal when we
actually get into the statistics part of the course that looks
like statistics, you know, with data
and estimation. So we've talked about
random variables, we've talked about
distributions, probability mass functions for discrete random variables and probability density functions for continuous random variables. In the next video, I want to tell you about
joint distributions and this is where you have two or more random variables,
for example, an X and a Y and you want to talk about how they
act together so maybe what is the
probability that X equals 2 and Y equals 3
at the same time, so joint probabilities and for joint probabilities we have joint probability mass functions and joint probability
density functions so I hope you come back and I will
see you in the next one.