Suppose that X and Y are
discrete random variables. I might want to talk about
the probability that X equals some fixed x and Y
equals some fixed y. In probability the word "and"
is represented by a comma. If you see this, it means the probability that
X equals x and Y equals y. This joint probability
is known as a joint probability
mass function when you think of it as a
function of x and y. We're going to call it
f, just like before, but it's going to
be a function of two variables, x and y. We can talk about the random variable X
taking on the value y. In case it's confusing, especially in a problem where we have many random variables, we might also use
subscripts on this PDF. The subscripts will tell us which random variables
the PDF goes with. Joint probability mass functions are most of the time not
written out with formulas, but instead in a tabular
form like this example. Across the top here
I can see that the possible values for x are 1, 2, and 3 and the possible
values for y are five and 11. If you want to know
the probability that x equals 1 and y equals 5, you just have to go into
the table and read it out. It's in this case 0.2. What if I want to know a
probability involving x alone? If I want to know the
probability that x equals 1, that comes from these two cases. I need to sum them. I'll get 0.2 plus
0.15 equals 0.35. This probability for x alone
is found in the margin. That's why this probability is known as a marginal probability. A marginal probability
is when you have multiple random variables and you move down in the
dimensions from 2-1, or maybe 10-1, or maybe 10-6. You sum out the random
variables you don't want. In this case, if we compute
all of these probabilities, they are describing marginal
probability mass functions. I can write them like this. The marginal PMF for x is the joint PMF with
all the y is summed out, and the y is the reverse. Let's get continuous. In the continuous case, the probability of seeing a particular value
is always zero, but if we have two
random variables, x and y, the joint
probability density function, remember before in the
one-dimensional case, it was a curve under which
area represented probability. Now it's a surface under which volume represents
probability. If I want the probability
that x is between a and b, and y is between c and d, and where these
things are strict or not strict in equalities
is not important, I would integrate the joint
PDF over that region. Just as in the discrete
case, analogously, we can get the marginal
probability density functions by integrating the joint PDFs over all of the values for the variable
that we don't want. Here's an example of a joint PDF for a continuous
random variables. I can write it piece-wise. It's taking the value
8 times x times y. If x is less than y and they're both
between zero and one. Here's one way to rewrite
this with Indicators. I can say that y is somewhere
between zero and one. Up here it looks like
y is greater than x, but there's no lower bound on x, so y can get arbitrarily small. That's why I'm saying y goes from 0-1 and x goes from 0-y. Another way to do this is to
let x run all the way from 0-1 and keep y up above x. This indicator is
going to be one when y is greater than x
and smaller than one. If you sketch this region, so here's an x and y axis, we see a triangular region. I haven't graphed the 3D PDF, but this triangular region is on the floor and the
PDF is above it. If you integrate over
the whole region, you should get one. Here are two ways to
do this integral. If you need to pause the video, and think about your
limits of integration. Let's find a marginal PDF for x. Imagine a particular fixed x, just fix it, for that x, you'll see that y goes from here, which is the line y equals
x up to here, which is one. The marginal PDF for x at x, I'm going to take the
joint PDF and integrate with respect to y
as y goes from x-1. I did that and I
get this function. This will hold for all
xs between zero and one. We can find the marginal PDF for y by integrating for a fixed y, we can take x from zero to y. I've already found the
marginal PDFs for x and y, and here I'm just going
to find one of them again and the reason
I'm doing it again is that I want to do it now with indicators is to give you an idea of how you can manipulate
Indicators in integrals. The marginal PDF for x is
going to be the integral of the joint pdf overall
minus infinity to infinity values for y. This is an integral
with respect to y. Eight can be pulled out. x is also a constant which can be pulled out
with respect to y. Then if the other
indicator in there says that y goes
from x up to one. I'm going to replace
this with a one and only allow the values of
y from x to one. In other words, changing
the limits of integration. Then you integrate and go and you're done and you
get the same thing. Random variables x and y are said to be independent if their joint PDF factors into the product of their
marginal PDFs. As an example, let's look
at our last example. We found these two marginal PDFs and when you multiply them, you do not get the
original joint PDF. Therefore, in this case, x and y are not independent. Here's another example. Here's another joint PDF
that is equal to x times y, and x goes from zero to one
and y goes from zero to two. To find the marginal pdf for x, I'm going to
integrate out the y's and define the
marginal PDF for y, I'm going to
integrate out the x's and I end up with
these two functions. This might be a good time for
you to pause the video and make sure you can get
the same marginal PDFs. We can see that x and y are independent because if I
multiply these marginal PDFs, I get the joint PDF back. I can see back here that this was going to
factor or be pulled apart and it was really
just a matter of figuring out what kind
of constants I need. Here I got a 2 1/2, but maybe I could get an
eighth and 1/8 or a 1/4 and 4, and does it really matter if I don't care about
the marginal PDFs? My question is, could I say, if the goal is to
show independence, could I just say this
factors into an x part and y part and let someone else work out the constants later if
they want the marginals. This would be a lot
easier. Let's go back to our first joint PDF example, 8xy. This eight times
x times y factors into an x part and a y part. We saw that they're not
independent and that's because the x and y are connected or tied together
in the Indicator. My question was, to
establish independence, do we really need to integrate
to find the marginal PDFs? or can we just say this joint PDF factors
into an x part and y part and let
someone else work out the constants if they
want the marginal PDFs? The answer is actually yes
if you include Indicators. This is one of several
reasons I really like to use Indicators
in probability. We're not going to prove it here. A quick way to see if
you're indicators are going to factor or
not factor is to sketch the region
because for this pdf, we wrote the indicator
product down in two ways, and who's to say we can
write down in another way where x and y are
completely disjoint. A picture is to say
that if you graph or sketch the region
over which you're integrating if it's rectangular. A rectangle or even an
infinite rectangle. This can go on up forever. Then that is enough to
say that you can rewrite the Indicators into
pure X1 and pure Y1. To sum up, x and y are
independent if the joint pdf factors into the
product of the two marginals. But my pro tip to you is a secret is that you don't need to integrate to
find those marginals. If you can just factor it, including the Indicators, then that's enough to
see they're independent. [NOISE] In our next video, we're going to talk about
the distribution of transformations of
random variables. Suppose that x has an exponential distribution
with parameter lambda and I want to know
the distribution of a new random variable y
that's equal to x squared. How are you going to
find it? Stay tuned.